
After carefully reviewing Elena Kagan's record and testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, I must oppose her nomination.  The American people want judges who impartially follow the text of the Constitution. They reject judges who use their power to impose their own political views — liberal or conservative — on the nation.

Throughout her career, Ms. Kagan has placed her politics above the law.

She has never been a judge, never tried a case before a jury and has practiced law for only three years. She is the least experienced nominee in the last half-century.

Her self-identified judicial heroes are among the most activist judges to ever serve. She even worked to confirm ACLU General Counsel Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the most activist judge now on the Supreme Court.

As a senior adviser to President Clinton, she was instrumental in efforts to restrict private gun rights and to stop legislation to limit "partial-birth" abortions.

As dean of Harvard Law School, Ms. Kagan kicked the military out of the campus recruitment office in violation of the federal law's equal access requirement. Because of her personal opposition to the "don't ask, don't tell" statute, she demeaned and punished the military as our troops were fighting and dying in two wars overseas.

Later, as solicitor general, Ms. Kagan gravely jeopardized the same statute when she allowed a severely flawed circuit court ruling to stand without challenge, despite her sworn duty to defend the law.

Unfortunately, her testimony at the Senate hearing failed to address these concerns, and was more like White House spin than a clear and honest response to questions.

President Obama himself has said that he looks for judges who will impose "their broader vision of what America should be." That is what he thinks he has in Ms. Kagan: someone who shares his big-government vision for the country, and who is willing to advance it from the bench.

In fact, when asked at the hearing, Ms. Kagan was unable to identify any constitutional limits on the government's power to control people's economic decisions.

Americans who are deeply troubled by Washington's growing disregard for the Constitution should also be troubled by this nomination. No senator should vote to confirm an individual to any court who lacks fidelity to the law.
