 Legal scholars have long debated whether the filibuster may be used to keep judicial nominees off the bench. For practical purposes, that question was answered on May 23, 2005. That night, while forging a settlement of a boiling debate, the bipartisan "Gang of 14" established that filibustering judges is allowed, but only under "extraordinary circumstances."

This controversy arose when Democratic senators met at a strategy retreat shortly after President George W. Bush took office. There, they made a calculated and historic decision to cast aside more than 200 years of Senate precedent and to openly and systematically filibuster even highly qualified Bush nominees.

Uproar ensued, leading to contentious debate and even an all-night Senate session. Then-Majority Leader Bill Frist (R-Tenn.) led a major effort to reestablish the tradition through a dramatic rule change referred to as the "nuclear option." At the last moment, a group of seven Democrats and seven Republicans reached a compromise: Henceforth, for them, judicial filibusters should not be undertaken unless "extraordinary circumstances" were present to justify the higher vote requirement to end debate.

Before that night, Democrats had succeeded in holding up a host of superb judicial nominees, including the current chief justice of the United States, John Roberts.

Then a federal appeals court nominee, Roberts waited two years for an up-or-down vote on his nomination, and he was among the lucky ones. Fantastic judges such as Terrence Boyle, Carolyn Kuhl and Miguel Estrada never even received a vote.

The Democrats' tactics were a dramatic change of Senate precedent, which had generally limited filibusters to legislative matters. These were politically motivated obstructions, not thoughtful debates on the nominees' character or judicial philosophy. In the midst of a filibuster of Priscilla Owen's nomination to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the 5th Circuit, Sen. Bob Bennett (R-Utah) suggested that 10 additional hours be allowed before a final vote. Then-Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) objected. How long did he need? "[T]here is not a number [of hours] in the universe that would be sufficient," Reid replied.

In all, 1,044 total votes were cast in attempts to deny 17 Bush nominees a chance at confirmation -- and 99.9 percent of them came from Democrats under Reid's leadership.

I wasn't among the handful of senators who arrived at the "extraordinary circumstances" compromise in 2005. In fact, I felt strongly, and had said publicly, that the use of the filibuster was inappropriate for judicial nominations. Even so, I recognized then -- as I do now -- that the Senate can set its own rules and that those rules had changed.

So, given this context, it's difficult to understand the majority leader's recent indignation over a Republican attempt to block only one of President Obama's most troubling nominees, Judge David Hamilton (since confirmed). It's curious that the architect of the judicial filibuster is complaining about its use.

In my view, Hamilton's record and past statements demonstrate an activist judicial philosophy that qualifies as "extraordinary." He has endorsed the view that judges write "footnotes to the Constitution" and has unapologetically embraced the flawed "empathy standard." His record includes a number of troubling rulings that evidence those beliefs.

To be clear, I believe that the president is entitled to a reasonable degree of deference on his judicial nominations. I supported more than 90 percent of President Bill Clinton's judicial nominees, and I hope I am able to do the same for President Obama, even if they would not be my top choices.

But I take seriously the Senate's constitutionally mandated role to "advise and consent," and I am obligated to oppose nominees who have demonstrated either an unwillingness to subordinate themselves to the Constitution or a desire to advance a political, social or economic agenda from the bench.

This year, a number of my colleagues and I have voted against just three judicial nominees, including Justice Sonia Sotomayor. Only in the case of Judge Hamilton have we raised a procedural objection to Majority Leader Harry Reid's desire to proceed to a vote.

For Republicans to ignore the changed rules would be to acquiesce in a system where 60 votes are needed to confirm judges nominated by Republicans, but only 51 are required to confirm judges nominated by Democrats. To allow such a double standard would be akin to unilateral disarmament.

A return to the tradition of up-or-down votes on all judicial nominees would, I believe, strengthen the Senate. I have offered to discuss with my colleagues ways this could be permanently codified in the Senate's official rules. So far, no takers. 


After carefully reviewing Elena Kagan's record and testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, I must oppose her nomination.  The American people want judges who impartially follow the text of the Constitution. They reject judges who use their power to impose their own political views — liberal or conservative — on the nation.

Throughout her career, Ms. Kagan has placed her politics above the law.

She has never been a judge, never tried a case before a jury and has practiced law for only three years. She is the least experienced nominee in the last half-century.

Her self-identified judicial heroes are among the most activist judges to ever serve. She even worked to confirm ACLU General Counsel Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the most activist judge now on the Supreme Court.

As a senior adviser to President Clinton, she was instrumental in efforts to restrict private gun rights and to stop legislation to limit "partial-birth" abortions.

As dean of Harvard Law School, Ms. Kagan kicked the military out of the campus recruitment office in violation of the federal law's equal access requirement. Because of her personal opposition to the "don't ask, don't tell" statute, she demeaned and punished the military as our troops were fighting and dying in two wars overseas.

Later, as solicitor general, Ms. Kagan gravely jeopardized the same statute when she allowed a severely flawed circuit court ruling to stand without challenge, despite her sworn duty to defend the law.

Unfortunately, her testimony at the Senate hearing failed to address these concerns, and was more like White House spin than a clear and honest response to questions.

President Obama himself has said that he looks for judges who will impose "their broader vision of what America should be." That is what he thinks he has in Ms. Kagan: someone who shares his big-government vision for the country, and who is willing to advance it from the bench.

In fact, when asked at the hearing, Ms. Kagan was unable to identify any constitutional limits on the government's power to control people's economic decisions.

Americans who are deeply troubled by Washington's growing disregard for the Constitution should also be troubled by this nomination. No senator should vote to confirm an individual to any court who lacks fidelity to the law.


Mr. President, I support the expansion of nuclear power, and so do the American people. Seventy percent, according to the Nuclear Energy Institute, believe we should either build new or expand existing nuclear powerplants. It is the key to our energy future in several different ways.

I believe we ought to have a robust goal toward expanding nuclear power, and that we should work to build 100 nuclear plants as quickly as possible. We built them quickly in wave of construction, and hopefully, we will be able to have a cookie-cutter design for plants that can be used on a regular basis with good engineering, and be a step above the plants we have today.

Nuclear energy is a clean source of domestic energy. It is American-made energy. It is the kind of energy the American people support. It has a role to play in reducing our dependence on foreign oil and bringing down the price of gasoline. If we could convert more cars to utilizing electricity through plug-in hybrids, then 24-hour-a-day base load nuclear power can charge automobile batteries at night when the grid is not at full demand and a person can drive 40 miles or so the next day without using a drop of gasoline.

Nuclear powerplants will provide long-term economic benefits. It makes great strides in reducing the amount of imported oil from foreign countries and it keeps our wealth at home. It certainly creates high-paying, clean American jobs. It is a serious solution to our energy future. New nuclear plant construction will supply as much as 50,000 megawatts of additional clean and affordable electricity to meet the demands of a growing economy.

Nuclear power is the most cost-effective way to generate electricity. While wind and solar certainly have roles, they simply will not take us far enough. The average nuclear production costs have declined more than 30 percent in the last 10 years to an average of 1.7 cents per kilowatt hour. This includes the cost of operating and maintaining the plant, purchasing the nuclear fuel, and paying for the management of used fuel. The low and stable cost of nuclear power helps to reduce the price of electricity paid by consumers. We cannot just say that we need to use energy sources that are clean; we must also produce electricity at an affordable price, and nuclear power meets both of these criteria.

One thing I am disappointed about in the bill we are working on today, is how this measure deals with the storage of nuclear waste. Yucca Mountain was chosen as the government's location for a deep geologic repository for the safe storage of used nuclear fuel. All aspects of the geological, hydrological, geochemical, and environmental impacts have been studied, including a detailed evaluation of how conditions might evolve over hundreds of thousands of years at Yucca Mountain. To date, we have spent more than 25 years and $10 billion on these studies, and the Department of Energy has summarized these studies in several scientific reports which served as the basis for the 2002 decision to approve Yucca Mountain as a site repository. These reports, which included input from extensive public review and comment, formed the foundation of DOE's June 2008 application to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission for a license to construct the repository.

Ending Yucca Mountain could not only hinder new nuclear construction, it could also pose a serious budget question. The repository is currently financed through the Nuclear Waste Fund. Presently, ratepayers pay a one-tenth of 1 cent fee for every kilowatt hour of nuclear power they consume. This is collected through the monthly utility bill paid by ratepayers.

Under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, DOE must review the adequacy of the Nuclear Waste Fund fee every year. DOE last performed a fee assessment in August of 2008, when it found the fee was adequate. As a result, the total amount of money paid into the fund is approximately $750 million per year and about $1 billion in interest per year. The Congressional Budget Office cost estimate unit told the House Budget Committee that CBO could not estimate what the fee should be:


In light of the [Obama] Administration's policy to terminate the Yucca Mountain project and pursue an alternative means of waste disposal, there is no current basis to judge the adequacy of the fee to cover future costs because the method of disposal and its lifecycle costs are unknown.


That is certainly true. Therefore, utilities and regulators are now asking the Department of Energy to suspend the fee on nuclear power. Why should they pay a fee that is supposed to ensure their wasted nuclear fuel will be taken to a repository when this administration has sought to stop this repository and seems to be making progress in that direction?

Suspending payments of the Nuclear Waste Fund could also complicate general budget matters as the Nuclear Waste Fund is included as a part of the General Treasury Fund, not a trust fund, and can be appropriated on an annual basis. The result is that these funds are often used for purposes other than the disposal of nuclear waste, with only IOUs being held to carry out the fund's purpose. For example, according to CBO, the fund provided $8 billion through 2006 in government spending that did not contribute to the deficit. In other words, they took this money from the fund. So we can see the issue. If the IOUs are ever paid, the money must come from somewhere, and that payment will be scored as an expenditure of the government. In fact, if lawsuits filed by utilities paying this fee to the government are successful, we are going to have to spend the money, according to the law, it seems to me, for nuclear waste disposal. If so, where will the money come from? We will have to find it in some other fashion. If we do like we do everything else around here, we will just add it to the deficit, another $8 billion to the current debt.

Additionally, we cannot forget that the Nation's $11 trillion deficit must also be factored into the debate. Regardless of what the President's Blue Ribbon Commission decides concerning Yucca Mountain, the DOE will have to pay for the disposal of nuclear waste. That is the legal requirement.

There are numerous lawsuits stemming from the delay. The courts have already found DOE partially in breach of contract for not taking the used fuel from the nuclear powerplants as required in exchange for the nuclear waste fee they have been paying. This has resulted in the Federal Government paying approximately $300 million to utilities in compensation costs, which is paid out of a judgment fund and not out of the Nuclear Waste Fund. They are not paying back the money with the funds already contributed by the utilities. They are taking it from the General Treasury, a judgment fund, and paying it out of that. And there may be more judgments coming along.

Also, DOE has appealed judgments totaling approximately $400 million in additional cases they may well lose. That will be another $400 million that will have to be found and there are close to 40 lawsuits that have not yet gone to trial.

According to CBO, because judicial claims for damages are made retrospectively, many more cases can be expected in the coming decades as utilities seek to recover their own costs for storing nuclear waste on site long after they expected it would be removed to a permanent disposal site.

The repository is also slated to hold high-level waste left over from the Cold War, and the government may be liable for compensation costs from States currently hosting defense waste as well. The Treasury Department has estimated it will cost DOE about $300 billion to clean up and monitor several government sites that are contaminated with hazardous and radioactive materials.

I ask my colleagues to listen to that number. As a result of activities in early nuclear development, there are waste sites in the country. The Department of Treasury has estimated it will cost about $300 billion to monitor and clean up several of those sites. I think that number is so breathtaking that I am amazed that more discussion has not occurred about it. I have raised the issue with the Department of Energy and the Department of Defense, as I serve on both Committees, and I believe it can be done for less than that. It has to be done for less than that. We do not have the $300 billion. We have to look for a better and more responsible way to deal with these cleanups. The waste needs to be stored somewhere. The President has indicated that Yucca Mountain is not one of the options for
disposal of nuclear waste.

I was disappointed to hear that. However, we must remember that Yucca Mountain remains the law of the land and that the administration does not have the ability to unilaterally terminate the project. In order to eliminate Yucca Mountain, Congress would have to amend the Nuclear Waste Policy Act, which set a deadline for the Federal Government to begin disposing of used fuel. However, more than a decade later, we still have not settled on a policy for how to accomplish this, and we have sunk nearly $10 billion into Yucca Mountain. That is a huge sum of money, even for the amounts we talk about today. Not to mention that it is the most studied geology on the planet.

I do not think we should abandon this project simply because of political pressure. Regardless of what this administration says, we will continue to face the problem of nuclear waste management. We must have a successful plan to dispose of nuclear waste, whether it is through direct disposal or recycling. I believe we need to go forward with recycling and I have offered legislation to do just that. Either way, we are going to need a site, but if we recycle this waste, it would be less toxic. It would be radioactive for far fewer years than would be the case if it were not recycled and perhaps would then be more palatable to those who object to the site.

Perhaps an answer, which to me makes sense, is to move the Nuclear Waste Fund off budget to a dedicated account so that the money will be used for what it was intended. Currently, it is being spent in other places and being replaced with an IOU. Why should utilities pay money into a fund when they are not getting any benefits that they were promised? It just lead us into liability and lawsuits, some of which are already being lost.

I believe nuclear power has proven to be exceedingly safe in America. Not one American has lost their life operating a nuclear powerplant.

The Three Mile Island situation, which caused so much fear and concern in America, did not result in even one person in the studies afterwards to have been sick. But the plants today, and the new ones we will build, will be even safer. They will be set up in such a way that even without power they would automatically shut themselves down through gravity flow into the reactor core. It is a new and safer design. They can be built in mass production quantities, resulting in lower costs per plant, and perfecting the technology and construction techniques that should result in reducing costs. It would allow the components to be produced in larger numbers, reducing costs, and help the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, because of the uniform nature of these plants, to regulate them even more effectively.

Mr. President, I thank the Presiding Officer and would say again, nuclear power produces about 20 percent of our electricity today. It emits no CO

2 or other global warming gases into the atmosphere. It is cost effective, it is all American, and it does not require us to expend large amounts of American wealth to foreign countries in order to maintain our energy supply. Nuclear power is the right thing to do, and I hope we will continue to work on it because I believe the country is ready to move in that direction.

I thank the Chair and yield the floor. 