My own personal theory is that Joseph built the pyramids to store grain. Now all the archaeologists think that they were made for the pharaohs’ graves. But, you know, it would have to be something awfully big if you stop and think about it. And I don’t think it’d just disappear over the course of time to store that much grain.
And when you look at the way that the pyramids are made, with many chambers that are hermetically sealed, they’d have to be that way for a reason. And various scientists have said, “Well, you know there were alien beings that came down and they have special knowledge and that’s how they were”—you know, it doesn’t require an alien being when God is with you.
So after a while, if people won't accept your excuses, you stop looking for them.
By believing we are the product of random acts, we eliminate morality and the basis of ethical behavior. For if there is no such thing as moral authority, you can do anything you want. You make everything relative, and there’s no reason for any of our higher values.
There are a group of people who would like to silence everybody and have everyone go along to get along. But that's not going to be very helpful for us in the long run in terms of solving our problems, and someone has to be courageous enough to actually stand up to the bullies
There's only two paragraphs in there about George Washington ... little or nothing about Martin Luther King, a whole section on slavery and how evil we are, a whole section on Japanese internment camps and how we slaughtered millions of Japanese with our bombs... I think most people when they finish that course, they'd be ready to go sign up for ISIS ... We have got to stop this silliness crucifying ourselves.
Of course black lives matter. But instead of people pointing fingers at each other and just creating strife, what we need to be talking about is: How do we solve problems in the black community? ... Whether I get the votes or not, I want people to start listening to what I am saying and understanding that ... there is a way to go that will lead to upward mobility as opposed to dependency.
There is no fulfillment in things whatsoever. And I think one of the reasons that depression reigns supreme amongst the rich and famous is some of them thought that maybe those things would bring them happiness. But what, in fact, does is having a cause, having a passion. And that's really what gives life's true meaning.
I'm not sure I want to say it quite like that, but my mother, Sonya Carson, was the earliest, strongest, and most impacting force in my life. It would be impossible to tell about my accomplishments without starting with my mother's influence.
Carol James, who is my physician's assistant and my right-hand person, frequently teases me by saying, "It's because women need only half of their brain to think as well as men. That's why you can do this operation on so many women. 
To THINK BIG and to use our talents doesn't mean we won't have difficulties along the way. We will—we all do. How we view those problems determines how we end up. If we choose to see the obstacles in our path as barriers, we stop trying. “We can't win,” we moan. “They won't let us win.”
However, if we choose to see the obstacles as hurdles, we can leap over them. Successful people don't have fewer problems. They have determined that nothing will stop them from going forward.
Whatever direction we choose, if we can realize that every hurdle we jump strengthens and prepares us for the next one, we're already on the way to success.
When someone is being particularly mean and nasty, I simply think to myself, He or she used to be a cute little baby, I wonder what happened?
Ultimately, if you accept the evolutionary theory, you dismiss ethics, you don’t have to abide by a set of moral codes, you determine your own conscience based on your own desires. You have no reason for things such as selfless love, when a father dives in to save his son from drowning. You can trash the Bible as irrelevant, just silly fables, since you believe that it does not conform to scientific thought. You can be like Lucifer, who said, “I will make myself like the Most High.
There is no fulfillment in things whatsoever. And I think one of the reasons that depression reigns supreme amongst the rich and famous is some of them thought that maybe those things would bring them happiness. But what, in fact, does is having a cause, having a passion. And that's really what gives life's true meaning.
I would like people to recognize in looking at my story that the person who has the most to do with what happens to you is you. It's not the environment, it's not the other people who were there trying to help you or trying to stop you. It's what you decide to do and how much effort you put behind it.
You know Obamacare is really I think the worst thing that has happened in this nation since slavery, and it is in a way, it is slavery in a way, because it is making all of us subservient to the government, and it was never about health care. It was about control.
The wonderful thing about a company like Mannatech is that they recognize that when God made us, He gave us the right fuel. And that fuel was the right kind of healthy food. You know we live in a society that is very sophisticated, and sometimes we’re not able to achieve the original diet. And we have to alter our diet to fit our lifestyle. Many of the natural things are not included in our diet. Basically what the company is doing is trying to find a way to restore natural diet as a medicine or as a mechanism for maintaining health.
Absolutely. Because a lot of people who go into prison go into prison straight -- and when they come out, they're gay. So, did something happen while they were in there? Ask yourself that question
Odds that you will die at some point in your life: 1 in 1. Thus, you might say the greatest, most significant, and universal risk factor in death is being born. This implies that it really isn't very helpful to approach the subject of risk by focusing on how we might die; rather, it's far wise to consider how we should live and what risk we will live with.
Every human being experiences risks; some of the risks are common to all humans, and some are unique to the life each of us has been given to live. But I know for certain that risk – both it's shadow and its reality – has shaped my life inside and out
“Tell the truth. If you tell the truth all the time you don't have to worry three months down the line about what you said three months earlier. Truth is always the truth. You won't have to complicate your life by trying to cover up.” 
“Reading activates and exercises the mind.
Reading forces the mind to discriminate. From the beginning, readers have to recognize letters printed on the page, make them into words, the words into sentences, and the sentences into concepts.
Reading pushes us to use our imagination and makes us more creatively inclined.” 
“First, we cannot overload the human brain. This divinely created brain has fourteen billion cells. If used to the maximum, this human computer inside our heads could contain all the knowledge of humanity from the beginning of the world to the present and still have room left over. Second, not only can we not overload our brain - we also know that our brain retains everything. I often use saying that "The brain acquires everything that we encounter." The difficulty does not come with the input of information, but getting it out. Sometimes we "file" information randomly of little importance, and it confuses us.” 
I became acutely aware of an unusual ability--a divine gift, I believe--of extraordinary eye and hand coordination. It’s my belief that God gives us all gifts, special abilities that we have the privilege of developing to help us serve Him and humanity. And the gift of eye and hand coordination has been an invaluable asset in surgery. This gift goes beyond eye-hand coordination, encompassing the ability to understand physical relationships, to think in three dimensions. Good surgeons must understand the consequences of each action, for they’re often not able to see what’s happening to see on the other side of the area in which the area they’re actually working.” 
However, at the moment, I believe the more important thing that can be done with the platform I have been given is to try to convince the American populace that we are not one another’s enemies even if a (D) is by some of our names and an (R) by the names of others. Knowing that the future of my grandchildren and everyone else’s is put in jeopardy by a continuation of reckless spending, godless government, and mean-spirited attempts to silence critics leaves me with little choice but to continue to expound on the principles outlined in my prayer breakfast speech and to fight for a bright future for America.”
“All citizens need to arm themselves with a basic knowledge of American history and stay abreast of current events, analyzing them with respect to history. Knowledge is power and at a time when the people are becoming increasingly impotent while the government grows larger and more powerful, it is vital that we arm ourselves with knowledge.” 
“The only reason I can imagine that it would be a good idea for government to foster dependency in large groups of citizens is to cultivate a dependable voting bloc that will guarantee continued power as long as the entitlements are provided. The problem of course is that such a government will eventually “run out of other people’s money,” as Margaret Thatcher once famously said.” 
“The secular progressive movement in America has been successful in removing all vestiges of faith in God from the public square. The very fact that people hesitate to say “Merry Christmas” to strangers lets you know just how successful they have been. Why are they so determined to remove God from our lives? They recognize that if we have no higher authority to answer to than man, we become gods unto ourselves and get to determine our own behavior. In their world, “If it feels good, do it.” They can justify anything based on their ideology because in their opinion, there is no higher authority other than themselves to overrule them. They have a visceral reaction to the mention of God’s word, because it tears at the fabric of their justification system.” 
There’s one more serious risk for America that I want to mention here—the risk we have created by shouting down and shutting up any discussion of faith in the public square. It’s as if we’ve decided expressions or discussions of faith shouldn’t qualify as free speech. What’s even stranger is the way it has somehow been tied to the concept of separation of church and state, even though that concept has nothing to do with people living by or publicly discussing their faith.” 
“If we no longer talk freely and openly about faith, we won’t understand the language or the significance of faith, we’ll misinterpret the religious words and deeds of others, and we’ll underestimate the power faith can have in the lives of those deeply committed to their spiritual beliefs. This may present a serious risk to a generation whose most troubling conflicts promise to involve people who are primarily motivated by a very different faith. If we don’t understand the faith roots of our American culture, how will we be able to defend it against theirs?”
“Some feel that it is fair for those with incomes under a certain dollar amount not to pay any federal tax. They say that these people are too poor and it would be a great burden to require them to contribute to the common pot. While I appreciate their compassion, serious problems arise when a person who pays nothing has the right to vote and determine what other people are paying.” 
“This power became addicting to many elected officials who, instead of going to Washington, DC, for a brief time to represent their constituency, wanted to hold their positions for extended periods of time — even for life. This growing power and the progressive intrusion of government into the lives of the people was so insidious that it went largely undetected.” 
“We have talked about World War I and World War II, but could World War III be in our future? The war on terror has already been declared, and unless we act with courage and decisiveness, there is no question that the terrorists will soon acquire nuclear weapons. Radical Islamic extremists are not satisfied to peacefully coexist with those they consider to be infidels. They feel that such people need to either be converted or destroyed — and there is no middle ground.” 
“Certainly the plight of such countries as Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain have received a lot of attention recently13 due to significant public outcries, demonstrations, and even riots because their governments have not been able to fulfill their promised social obligations to the people due to lack of funds, despite high tax rates. We could not ask for more timely examples of what happens when we abandon our founding principles of limited government and protecting individual rights.” 
“Despite their differences in wealth, the framers were careful to avoid anything resembling class warfare, keeping any idea of wealth redistribution out of the Constitution. Many of the framers were familiar with the deleterious effects of class warfare, which was prominent throughout Europe. They hoped that a more egalitarian atmosphere would characterize American culture. They envisioned a country where people would rise and fall based on their abilities and contribution rather than their pedigree. To that end, they put aside their socioeconomic differences and worked together.” 
“Those who propelled our nation to the pinnacle status in a very short period of time also knew the importance of sacrifice. Now it sometimes seems our government leaders do not understand the concept of sacrifice. They have no problem with the populace sacrificing, but our federal government does not seem to know how to tighten its own belt, preferring to simply raise taxes to cover its own excesses” 
“Today our nation is in such shambles that it appears that almost anyone could do a better job of execution than the current leaders. The principal problem appears to be a lack of congruency between the president and the people. His goal seems to be a utopian society managed by the government, rather than the free, self-governing society that the founders left us. Americans want to be free, and the president’s approval ratings indicate that “we the People” do not agree with his goals. I pray that the next president will have a set of values that matches those of the majority of Americans. I pray that he will use his power to encourage the “can-do” attitude that characterized America’s rapid ascent to the pinnacle of the world.” 
“The enormous salaries paid to sports stars and entertainers lead people to believe that they are the most important people in our society, or have the most important jobs. I believe they are as important as anyone else, but we must ask ourselves what will maintain the pinnacle position of our nation in the world: the ability to shoot a twenty-five-foot jump shot, or the ability to solve a quadratic equation.” 
“Our country, as well as the rest of the world, faces an enormous threat from ISIS and other radical Islamic terrorist organizations that aspire to achieve world domination. These were the same aspirations held by the followers of Adolf Hitler in the 1930s. Our government must recognize the importance of directly and vigorously confronting these forces of evil. We must not make the mistake of avoiding necessary conflict; we did not get involved in World War I or World War II until we felt that American interests were directly threatened, and this proved to be the wrong choice, though we eventually were victorious. If a vicious enemy that is willing to decapitate people, burn people alive, and even crucify children is allowed to grow with only minor to moderate resistance, it will only become a more formidable adversary in the future. If during this period of tepid responses to terrorist expansion the radical Islamists manage to acquire nuclear weapons, providing for the common defense will take on an entirely new different meaning. The longer we wait to eliminate the threat, the more difficult that task will become and the more dangerous the world will be for our children and grandchildren. We must use all necessary resources to protect the lives of our people. Given the existence of enemies who have a stated goal of destroying our nation and our way of life, one way to provide for the common defense is to hide, which in our case would not be possible. A better option is to try to eliminate the threat, and the earlier the threat can be eliminated, the fewer lives will be lost in the conflict.” 
“If from the more wretched parts of the old world, we look at those which are in an advanced stage of improvement, we still find the greedy hand of government thrusting itself into every corner and crevice of industry, and grasping the spoil of the multitude. Invention is continually exercised, to furnish new pretenses for revenues and taxation. It watches prosperity as its prey and permits none to escape without tribute.” 
We were very poor. But between the covers of books I could go anywhere, I could be anybody, I could do anything. I began to read about people of great accomplishment. As I read those stories, I began to see a connecting thread. I began to see that the person who had the most to do with you and what happened to you in life, is you. You make decisions. You decide how much energy you want to put behind that decision
Some historical revisionists have also attempted to diminish the role of God and religion in our nation’s past. A careful examination of the records, however, makes it quite clear that religion was a very important factor in the development of our nation. In 1831 when Alexis de Tocqueville came to America to try to unravel the secrets to the success of a fledgling nation that was already competing with the powers of Europe on virtually every level, he discovered that we had a fantastic public educational system that rendered anyone who had finished the second grade completely literate. He was more astonished to discover that the Bible was an important tool used to teach moral principles in our public schools. No particular religious denomination was revered, but rather commonly accepted biblical truths became the backbone of our social structure.”
mother instilled in me a deep respect for the potential of the human brain, and that respect has deepened over the years to an attitude I can only describe as awe. Every time I open a child’s head and see a brain, I marvel at the mystery: This is what makes every one of us who we are. This is what holds all our memories, all our thoughts, all our dreams. This is what makes us different from each other in millions of ways. And yet if I could expose my brain and your brain and place them side by side, you wouldn’t be able to tell the difference—even though we might be very different people. That still amazes me. Inside each human brain are billions and billions of complex interconnections, neurons and synapses, which science has only barely begun to understand. When you add to that the mystery of mind

Extremely good and highly successful at whatever we attempted. Even today I can hear her voice in the back of my head saying, “Bennie, you can do it. Don’t you stop believing that for one second.” Mother had only a third-grade education when she married, yet she provided the driving force in our home. She pushed my laid-back father to do a lot of things. Largely because of her sense of frugality, they saved a fair amount of money and eventually bought out first house. I suspect that, had things gone Mother’s way, ultimately they would have been financially well-off. And I’m sure she had no premonition of the poverty and hardship she’d have to face in the years ahead. By contrast, my father was six feet two, slender, and he often said, “You got to look sharp all the time, Bennie. Dress the way you want to be.” He emphasized clothes and possessions, and he enjoyed being around people. “Be nice to people. People are important, and if you’re nice to them, they’ll like you.” Recalling those words, I believe he put great importance on being liked by everybody. If anyone asked me to describe my dad, I’d have to say, “He’s just a nice guy.” And, despite all the problems that erupted later, I feel that way today. My father was the kind of person who would have wanted us to wear the fancy clothes and to do the macho kind of things like girl hunting – the lifestyle that would have been detrimental to establishing ourselves academically. In many ways, I’m now grateful my mother took us out of that environment. Intellectually, Dad didn’t easily grasp complex problems because he tended to get bogged down in details, unable to see the overall picture. That was probably the biggest difference between my parents. Both parents came from big families: my mother had 23 siblings, and my father grew up with 13 brothers and sisters. They married when my father was 28 and my mother was 13. Many years later she confided that she was looking for a way to get out of a desperate home situation.


Make me understand what I didn’t want to grasp. “Bennie, your daddy did some bad things. Real bad things.” I swiped my hand across my eyes. “You can forgive him then. Don’t let him go.” “It’s more than just forgiving him, Bennie – “ “But I want him to stay here with Curtis and me and you”
Once again Mother tried to make me understand why Daddy was leaving, but her explanation didn’t make a lot of sense to me at 8 years of age. Looking back, I don’t know how much of the reason for my father’s leaving sank into my understanding. Even what I grasped, I wanted to reject. My heart was broken because Mother said that my father was never coming home again. And I loved him.
Dad was affectionate. He was often away, but when he was home he’d hold me on his lap, happy to play with me whenever I wanted him to. He had great patience with me. I particularly liked to with the veins on the back of his large hands, because they were so big. I’d push them down and watch them pop back up. “Look! They’re back again!” I’d laugh, trying everything within the power of my small hands to make his veins stay down. Dad would sit quietly, letting me play as long as I wanted.
Sometimes he’d say, “Guess you’re just not strong enough,” and I’d push even harder. Of course nothing worked, and I’d soon lose interest and play with something else. Even though Mother said that Daddy has done some bad things, I couldn’t think of my father as “bad” because he’d always been good to my brother, Curtis, and me. Sometimes Dad brought us present for no reason. “Thought you’d like this,” he’d say offhandedly, a twinkle in his dark eyes. Many afternoons I’d pester my mother or watch the clock until I knew it was time for my dad to come home from work. Then I’d rush outside and wait for his. I’d watch until I saw him walking down our alley. “Daddy! Daddy!” I’d yell, running to meet him. He would scoop me into his arms and carry me into the house. That stopped in 1959 when I was 8 years old and Daddy left home for good. TO my young, hurting heart the future stretched out forever. I couldn’t imagine a life without daddy and didn’t know if Curtis, my 10-year-old brother, or I would ever see him again.
I don’t know how long I continued the crying and questioning the day Daddy left; I only know it was the saddest day of my life. And my questions didn’t stop with my tears. For weeks I pounded my mother with every possible argument my mind could conceive, trying to find some way to get her to make Daddy come back home. 
“How can we get by without Daddy?”
“Why don’t you want him to stay?”
“He’ll be good. I know he will. Ask Daddy. He won’t do bad things again.”
My pleading didn’t make any difference. My parents had settled everything before they told Curtis and me. 
“Mothers and fathers are supposed to stay together,” I persisted, “They’re both supposed to be with their little boys.”
“Yes, Bennie, but sometimes it just doesn’t work out right.”
“I still don’t see why,” I said. I thought of all the things Dad did with us. For instance, on most Sundays, Dad would take Curtis and me for drives in the car. Usually we visited people, and we’d often stop by to see one family in particular. Daddy would talk with the grown-ups, while my brother and I played with the children. Only later did we learn the truth – my father had another “wife” and other children that we know nothing about.
I don’t know how my mother found out about his double life, for she never burdened Curtis and me with the problem. In fact, now that I’m and adult, my one complaint is that she went out of her way to protect us from knowing how bad things were. We were never allowed to share how deeply she hurt. But then, that was Mother’s way of protecting us, thinking she was doing the right thing. And many years later I finally understood what she called his “betrayals with women and drugs.” Long before Mother knew about the other family, I sensed things weren’t right between my parents. My parents didn’t argue; instead, my father just walked away. He had been leaving the house more and more and staying away longer and longer. I never knew why. Yet when Mother told me “Your daddy isn’t coming back,” those words broke my heart.
I didn’t tell Mother, but every night when I went to bed I prayed, “Dear Lord, help Mother and Dad get back together again.” In my heart I just knew God would help them make up so we would be a happy family. I didn’t want them to be apart, and I couldn’t imagine facing the future without my father. But Dad never came home again.
As the days and weeks passed, I learned we could get by without him. We were poorer then, and I could tell Mother worried, although she didn’t say much to Curtis or me. As I grew wiser, and certainly by the time I was 11, I realized that the three of us were actually happier than we had been with Dad in the house. We had peace. No periods of deathly silence filled the house. I no longer froze with fear or huddled in my room, wondering what was happening when Mother and Daddy didn’t talk. That’s when I stopped praying for them to get back together. “It’s better for them to stay split up,” I said to Curtis. “Isn’t it?” “Yeah, guess so,” he answered. And, like Mother, he didn’t say much to me about his own feelings. But I think I knew that he too reluctantly realized that our situation was better without our father. Trying to remember how I felt in those days after Dad left, I’m not aware of going thorough stages of anger and resentment. My mother says that the experience pushed Curtis and me into a lot of pain. I don’t doubt that his leaving meant a terrible adjustment for both of us boys. Yet I still have no recollection beyond his initial leaving. Maybe that’s how I learned to handle my deep hurt – by forgetting.
“We just don’t have the money, Bennie.”
In the months after Dad left, Curtis and I must have heard that statement a hundred times, and, of course, it was true. When we asked for toys or candy, as we’d done before, I soon learned to tell from the expression on Mother’s face how deeply it hurt to deny us. After a while I stopped asking for what I knew we couldn’t have anyway. In a few instances resentment flashed across my mother’s face. Then she’d get calm and explain to us boys that Dad loved us but wouldn’t give her any money to support us. I vaguely recall a few times when Mother went to court, trying to get child support from him. Afterward, Dad would send money for a month or two – never the full amount – and he always had a legitimate excuse. “I can’t give you all of it this time,” he’d say, “but I’ll catch up. I promise.”
Dad never caught up. After a while Mother gave up trying to get any financial help from him. I was aware that he wouldn’t give her money, which made life harder on us. And in my childish love for a dad who had been kind and affectionate, I didn’t hold it against him. But at the same time I couldn’t understand how he could love us and not want to give us money for food.
One reason I didn’t hold any grudges or harsh feelings towards Dad must have been that my mother seldom blamed him – at least not to us or in our hearing. I can hardly think of a time when she spoke against him. More important than that fact, though, Mother managed to bring a sense of security to our three-member family. While I still missed Dad for a long time, I felt a sense of contentment being with just my mother and my brother because we really did have a happy family. My mother, a young woman with hardly any education, came from a large family and had many things against her. Yet she pulled off a miracle in her own life, and helped in ours. I can still hear Mother’s voice, no matter how bad things were, saying, “Bennie, we’re going to be fine.” Those weren’t empty words either, for she believed them. And because she believed them, Curtis and I believed them too, and they provided a comforting assurance for me. Part of Mother’s strength came from a deep-seated faith in God and perhaps just as much from her innate ability to inspire Curtis and me to know she meant every word she said. We knew we weren’t rich; yet no matter how bad things got for us, we didn’t worry about what we’d have to eat or where we’d live.
Our growing up without a father put a heavy burden on my mother. She didn’t complain  - at least not to us – and she didn’t feel sorry for herself. She tried to carry the whole load, and somehow I understood what she was doing. No matter how many hours she had to be away from us at work, I knew she was doing it for us. That dedication and sacrifice made a profound impression on my life. Abraham Lincoln once said, “All that I am or ever hope to be, I owe to my mother.” I’m not sure I want to say it quite like that, but my mother, Sonya Carson, was the earliest, strongest, and most impacting force in my life. It would be impossible to tell about my accomplishments without starting with my mother’s influence. For me to tell my story means beginning with hers,

While much of our FORWARD initiative consists of plans for the future, HUD is hard at work this very moment responding to the recent hurricanes, and planning for the long-term recovery of the areas impacted by them. I am particularly pleased that HUD’s Deputy Secretary, Pamela Patenaude, is now in office. Deputy Secretary Patenaude has expertise from Hurricanes Katrina and Rita during a previous tour at HUD, and has already proven to be a tremendous asset in her role as the Chair of the Department’s Disaster Management Group. Even before a hurricane hits, HUD’s local field staff are identifying vacant units in the potentially impacted areas and working with our stakeholders to prepare for the hurricane. Since these storms hit, many employees from around the nation volunteered to go to affected areas, becoming the face of the Department and providing first-hand assessments. Anthony Landecker is one such employee that I had an opportunity to meet during a recent trip to Beaumont, Texas. Anthony moved with his wife and two young children from Minnesota to help with the recovery efforts. We owe Anthony, and all those who have volunteered to respond to these disasters, our gratitude. To all the amazing employees at HUD working to respond to the devastation of Harvey, Irma, and Maria: thank you. HUD is supporting FEMA to move displaced residents into temporary and interim habitable housing in each of the impacted areas. HUD has staff at shelters and disaster recovery centers to work with the survivors and local supportive service providers to identify housing solutions and needed services. 3  HUD also works with other federal agencies as well, such as HHS and USDA, to coordinate our disaster recovery efforts. FEMA also has been a close partner, inspecting thousands of damaged dwellings a day. FEMA’s inspection data will allow HUD to estimate the unmet repair needs, and assists HUD in its long-term recovery efforts. We are also working closely with communities to support those who were homeless prior to the storms, to help ensure their safety and address their continuing need for housing. Part of our strategy will be working to ensure that emergency shelters are meeting the needs of the most vulnerable. In addition, we are providing FHA mortgage insurance to people who have lost their homes. Some will be eligible for 100 percent financing through HUD’s Section 203(h) program. HUD has also granted a 90-day moratorium on foreclosures, and a 90-day forbearance on foreclosures of FHA-insured mortgages.
While there remains robust debate about how to solve the complex problems that HUD tackles every day, we should all be able to agree that roofs over peoples’ heads, strong families, and healthy communities help foster and develop the God-given potential of those Americans that HUD assists. To do so, we need an innovative approach that responds to today, not yesterday. After all, America has changed greatly since HUD was established as part of Lyndon Johnson’s “Great Society” programs over 50 years ago, and we must learn to evolve with the country. While HUD has been around for 50 years, many Americans still struggle to find affordable housing. The Worst-Case Housing Needs 2017 Report indicates that alarmingly high numbers of Americans continue to pay more than half of their incomes toward rent and/or live in inadequate conditions. Chronic homelessness continues to plague tens of thousands of our countrymen, and many millions remain mired in poverty, rather than being guided on a path out of it. History has made clear that spending more taxpayer dollars does not necessarily create better outcomes. 1  We must constantly evaluate our programs to ensure that we are delivering services effectively and efficiently to HUD’s constituents, and responding to today’s challenges with the best practices and technologies. Since I arrived at HUD in March, it has been my mission to employ the wealth of institutional knowledge held by career staff to improve our services, reform our programs to reflect realities of modern society, and remain careful stewards of taxpayer dollars. My experiences and interactions with the talented employees of HUD have been extremely gratifying and inspiring. With that in mind, it is encouraging that in the 2017 Federal Employee Viewpoint Survey, HUD had the highest Employee Engagement Score (69%) we have seen in the last three years. Hearing the voices of HUD team members on issues from workplace conditions to program efficiency continues to be vital to building a better agency. After several months of hard work, our team has outlined a bold plan for institutional reform and improvement that will better serve all Americans—those who benefit from our programs, the taxpayers who fund us, and the hard-working employees who have dedicated their careers to helping those served by HUD. It is called the FORWARD initiative.
The centerpiece of this year’s Budget proposal is our promotion of economic opportunity and self-sufficiency. For too many years, we have measured the effectiveness of housing and other anti-poverty programs by the number of Americans participating in them. With this Budget, we propose measuring success by the number of people we help to exit the programs with positive outcomes. To help transition the people HUD serves towards economic independence, we are requesting $75 million for the Family Self-Sufficiency program and $10 million for Jobs Plus. We are also requesting funding to evaluate the EnVision Center Initiative, a demonstration that will leverage public-private partnerships to connect individuals and families living in HUDassisted housing with job-training, education, health and wellness, and other streamlined services that lead to self-sufficiency. HUD is also beginning to pivot from the current, financially unsustainable model of public housing and will be working with Public Housing Authorities (PHAs) to find the best way to support assisted families through other housing platforms. It was a difficult decision to not request funding for capital improvements in Public Housing. Instead, we’ve asked for PHAs to have the flexibility to use operating funds for capital needs. This will allow PHAs to function more like every other multifamily building owner in America. We also believe that encouraging states and localities to bring more resources to the table helps ensure that PHAs are empowered to make decisions at the local level that best address the needs of their communities. As part of the transformation of public housing, HUD is committed to providing new strategies and enhancing existing tools so that PHAs are provided with additional options to operate their portfolios. For example, HUD is developing a streamlined process to allow PHAs to convert public housing assistance to vouchers where this would save taxpayer money and give families more choice in deciding where to live. HUD is proposing to convert an expanded number of units in our nation’s housing stock to project-based Section 8 ownership via the Rental Assistance Demonstration (RAD). RAD is a program that multiplies the impact of private and other investment in order to rehabilitate aging affordable housing across the country. In order to stretch those dollars further, HUD is requesting $100 million specifically for RAD and supports lifting the cap on RAD units so more communities can participate. To date, PHAs and their partners have raised $5 billion to improve and recapitalize 88,000 public housing units at revenue neutral rent levels. This would have taken decades to accomplish through traditional public housing funding streams.
