The WTO agreements, as originally negotiated, clearly provided the United States with effective legal grounds to combat unfairly subsidized imports that disadvantage our workers and businesses.  The panel report represents the latest example of judicial activism at the WTO seeking to undermine those laws and make it harder for Members to address unfair trade.  The United States has long warned that the attack on our trade laws risks undermining the credibility of the WTO, and we again urge Members to consider the harm resulting from such rulings.
I would also note the countervailing duties at issue here were terminated on July 5.  Remarkably, however, Canada has refused to drop this litigation.  In other words, Canada appears to be more interested in attacking our anti-subsidy laws than in resolving this particular dispute.  By pursuing this litigation, Canada is helping non-market countries like China that are more likely to use the type of hidden subsidies at issue in this case.  The end result of such policies will be a global trading system that encourages unfair subsidies and puts true market-oriented companies – in both Canada and the United States – at an unfair disadvantage.

The President is pleased that Congress has extended Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) for three more years, which he requested as part of his Trade Agenda.  Extension of TPA is critical to negotiating accountable, enforceable and reciprocal trade deals that will benefit American workers, farmers and ranchers.  The Trump Administration is pursuing a number of potential bilateral free trade agreements, and TPA extension means we may continue to aggressively pursue these opportunities.

I support the President’s action.  The initial tariffs that the President asked us to put in place were proportionate and responsive to forced technology transfer and intellectual property theft by the Chinese.  It is very unfortunate that instead of eliminating these unfair trading practices China said that it intends to impose unjustified tariffs targeting U.S. workers, farmers, ranchers, and businesses.  At the President’s direction, USTR is preparing the proposed tariffs to offset China’s action.

For many weeks now, the United States, Mexico and Canada have engaged in intensive, continuous discussions to renegotiate NAFTA, building on the seven rounds of rigorous negotiations that have taken place since August 2017.  The negotiations have covered a large number of very complex issues, especially those objectives outlined by Congress as part of the bipartisan Trade Promotion Authority such as intellectual property, dairy and agriculture, de minimis levels, energy, labor and more. 
The current NAFTA is a seriously flawed trade deal, and the Trump Administration is committed to getting the best possible trade agreement for all Americans.  The United States is ready to continue working with Mexico and Canada to achieve needed breakthroughs on these objectives.  Our teams will continue to be fully engaged.

It is not fair that U.S. consumers subsidize the global market by paying significantly higher prices for these lifesaving drugs,” said Ambassador Lighthizer. “Our trading partners need to contribute their fair share toward pharmaceutical research and development by providing robust levels of intellectual property protection and enforcement, as well as having fair and transparent drug pricing systems. At the President’s direction, we are going to use every tool available to ensure U.S. pharmaceuticals are fairly priced around the world.

President Trump is proposing an appropriate response to China’s recent threat of new tariffs.  After a detailed investigation, USTR found overwhelming evidence that China’s unreasonable actions are harming the U.S. economy.  In the light of such evidence, the appropriate response from China should be to change its behavior, as China’s government has pledged to do many times.  Economies around the world – including China’s own – would benefit if China would implement policies that truly reward hard work and innovation, rather than continuing its policies that distort the vital high-tech sector.
Unfortunately, China has chosen to respond thus far with threats to impose unjustified tariffs on billions of dollars in U.S. exports, including our agricultural products.  Such measures would undoubtedly cause further harm to American workers, farmers, and businesses.  Under these circumstances, the President is right to ask for additional appropriate action to obtain the elimination of the unfair acts, policies, and practices identified in USTR’s report.
