Republican Beats IraqVeteran in Ohio Vote
A former Republican state legislator narrowly won a special Congressional election in southern Ohio on Tuesday, ending an underdog bid by her Democratic opponent to become the first combat veteran from the Iraq war to serve in Congress.

With all of the precincts reporting, Jean Schmidt, the Republican, had nearly 52 percent of the vote, edging out her challenger, Paul L. Hackett, a major in the Marine Forces Reserve, by about 4,000 votes.

"Voters declared that they support our president and approve of his leadership," Ms. Schmidt, 53, told supporters gathered at a suburban Holiday Inn late Tuesday evening. "They want us to stay the course so the enemies of freedom cannot bring their terrorism to our shores again."

But Mr. Hackett's showing was unexpectedly strong in this district, a Republican bastion that snakes along the Ohio River from affluent Cincinnati suburbs to struggling Appalachian hamlets. President Bush won the district with 64 percent of the vote last year, and Republicans have held its Congressional seat for two decades.

"Tonight was a victory for democracy," Mr. Hackett, 43, told supporters at a downtown Cincinnati theater. "People had a real choice." Mr. Hackett has said he expects to sign up for another tour of duty in Iraq, possibly next summer.

The race was to fill the seat vacated by Representative Rob Portman, who resigned this year to become Mr. Bush's trade representative, and it gained national attention not only because of Mr. Hackett's combat service but also because he harshly criticized President Bush.

Mr. Hackett called Mr. Bush a "chicken hawk" for failing to serve in Vietnam and "a cheerleader for the enemy" for challenging Islamic militants to "bring it on" against American troops. He also sharply questioned his policies on tax cuts and Social Security.

But in a nod to Mr. Bush's popularity here, Mr. Hackett used a clip of the president praising military veterans in a television commercial, prompting the Republican National Committee to issue a letter of protest against his campaign.

Democrats had hoped that a victory by Mr. Hackett would not only be a sharp blow to Mr. Bush's national standing but also set a template for future campaigns by Democratic war veterans.

They had also hoped that the race would show the weakness of the Ohio Republican Party, which dominates state government but has been shaken in recent months by a widening scandal involving Gov. Bob Taft's administration and the state's workers compensation fund.

But Republicans viewed Mr. Hackett's attacks as a call to arms, and they poured money and resources into the district to ensure his defeat. Mr. Bush taped a telephone message to voters, and the National Republican Congressional Committee bought $325,000 in air time for a television spot this past weekend.

Perhaps most important, the Republican organization in Clermont County, Ms. Schmidt's base, turned out voters in greater numbers than expected, pushing her over the top. The returns showed that Ms. Schmidt won handily in most of the affluent Cincinnati suburbs, while Mr. Hackett won the district's more rural counties.

In the final days of the campaign, Ms. Schmidt accused the Hackett campaign of misleading voters by claiming that he would be the first Iraq war veteran to serve in Congress. In fact, the Schmidt campaign said, Representative Mark Steven Kirk, Republican of Illinois, has been serving in the Iraq war as a Navy Reserve officer.

But in an interview, Mr. Kirk said he had not gone to Iraq for the military, and instead worked one weekend a month in an intelligence unit at the Pentagon. Mr. Hackett spent seven months in Iraq leading a civil affairs unit in Ramadi and Fallujah before returning to Ohio in March.

A former deputy mayor and the embattled incumbent, Kwame M. Kilpatrick, emerged from a 12-candidate nonpartisan mayoral primary on Tuesday to advance to the general election in November.

With 72 percent of precincts reporting, the former deputy, Freman Hendrix, had 45 percent of the vote, and Mayor Kilpatrick 33 percent. Sharon McPhail, a city councilwoman, ran third with 12 percent. All three are Democrats.


Manton Plans to Retire From Congress at End of Year
Representative Thomas J. Manton, a plain-spoken Democrat who has quietly represented northwestern Queens for 14 years, announced today that he would retire from Congress at the end of the year to return to his private law practice.

His announcement, which came as a surprise to many politicians in New York and Washington, makes him the sixth member of New York's Congressional delegation to have retired or chosen not to seek re-election in the last year, a bipartisan trend that many political analysts say will significantly weaken the state's influence on Capitol Hill next year.

The 65-year-old Congressman, who is also chairman of the Queens County Democratic organization -- a job he says he will keep, handled the announcement in a style befitting his place as one of New York City's last remaining party bosses: he handpicked the man who will run on the Democratic line to replace him in November.

That man will be Assemblyman Joseph Crowley, 36, a protege of Mr. Manton's, who is heavily favored to win the November election in the overwhelmingly Democratic district, which stretches from the Queensboro Bridge to Shea Stadium and includes a small part of the Bronx.

By announcing his plans so late in the year, Mr. Manton virtually insured that Mr. Crowley would have little or no competition from Republicans or other Democrats, a maneuver that drew admiring comments from some Queens politicians but angered Democrats who also were interested in running for the seat.
Under state election rules, Mr. Manton's replacement on the Democratic line had to be selected by a committee within the Queens County Democratic Party. At Mr. Manton's urging, that committee selected Mr. Crowley at 11 o'clock this morning -- minutes before other potential candidates were even notified of Mr. Manton's announcement.

''Had I known about the meeting, I would have put my name in,'' said City Councilman Walter L. McCaffrey, who said Mr. Manton called him to announce his resignation plans shortly after 11 A.M. ''Having been one of the people who helped elect Tom, and having been his chief of staff, it is a disappointment.''

Another prominent Democrat in the district, Assemblywoman Catherine T. Nolan, said Mr. Manton called her with the news just as the committee was meeting. Though Ms. Nolan said she was not sure whether she wanted to run, she expressed frustration at having been locked out of the process. ''That's how the Queens County organization works,'' Ms. Nolan said. ''On that point, it's hardly surprising.''

Republican Party officials also said they were caught off guard by Mr. Manton's late announcement. Had they known that he was planning to retire, the Republicans said, they would have tried to unite with the Conservative and Right to Life Parties against Mr. Crowley. Now, it is too late to do that.

The Republicans also did not aggressively collect nominating signatures for their Congressional candidate, James Dillon, largely because they expected him to have little chance of defeating Mr. Manton. Now that Mr. Manton is leaving, the Republicans say they expect Mr. Dillon to be knocked off the ballot because of insufficient signatures.

Associates and aides to Mr. Manton denied that he rigged the process to help Mr. Crowley. And they said his decision to announce his retirement so close to the election came only after much soul-searching that led him to conclude that he had grown bored with the job and wanted to devote more time to his family and political work in Queens.

''He waited to this point because he wasn't sure he was not going to run,'' said James J. Mathews, Mr. Manton's chief of staff.

Mr. Manton, a former councilman and city police officer, said he would probably return to his Queens law practice, which has built up a lucrative business handling probate cases, and may also do some consulting.

''I love this place and love the honor of being here,'' he said from his Washington office today. ''I just don't want to spend the rest of my life here. I don't have an agenda for higher office or anything like that, so this seems like a good time to retire from Congress.''

Mr. Manton first ran for the seat in 1978 but lost to Geraldine A. Ferraro. When Ms. Ferraro resigned to run for Vice President in 1984, Mr. Manton ran and won.

A moderate Democrat who often despaired of Manhattan Democrats' liberal leanings, he cut a low profile in Congress, working behind the scenes to shape legislation before the powerful Commerce Committee and to direct Federal resources toward his district. He also was active in Irish political causes, serving as co-chairman of the Congressional Ad-Hoc Committee on Irish Affairs.

Mr. Crowley, who has been in the Assembly for 12 years, is cut from a similar mold. Like Mr. Manton, he opposes abortion rights, supports tough anti-crime measures, including the death penalty, and takes a keen interest in Ireland. In Albany, he was a leading advocate of legalizing casino gambling.

Last year, Representatives Floyd H. Flake, a Queens Democrat, and Susan Molinari, a Staten Island Republican, retired. Earlier this year, Representatives Gerald B. H. Solomon, a Glens Falls Republican, and Bill Paxon, a Buffalo Republican, announced that they would retire at year's end. And Representative Charles E. Schumer, the Brooklyn Democrat, is running for the Senate.


Clinton to Back L.I.R.R. Tunnel, Officials Say
In the first step toward building an East River tunnel that would connect the Long Island Rail Road to Grand Central Terminal, President Clinton will include $20 million in planning funds for the long-sought project in his budget proposal to Congress next month, Congressional officials said today.

The tunnel, known as the East Side Access project, had been pushed by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who persuaded Congress to approve $353 million over five years for the idea in Federal transportation legislation last year.

But after Mr. D'Amato's defeat in November, Gov. George E. Pataki and other advocates of the tunnel worried that Congress might try to take funds away from the project. Senator Charles E. Schumer, who ousted Mr. D'Amato, has said he is still studying the proposal and has not committed to supporting it.

But Mr. Clinton's decision to provide seed money for the project will help allay some of those concerns at least for the coming year, said Representative Peter T. King, a Nassau County Republican who has been lobbying for the project.

Mr. King was one of only a handful of Republicans in the House to oppose impeaching Mr. Clinton. But he said he had not spoken to the President about the project and did not believe that the money was connected to his stand on impeachment.

The tunnel is projected to cost $2.2 billion. Currently, Long Island Rail Road trains arriving in Manhattan stop only at Pennsylvania Station, meaning that 47,000 commuters who work on the East Side must double back by foot or in taxis, subways or buses. Having trains stop at Grand Central would save those people money and time, as well as reduce pollution and traffic, advocates of the tunnel say.

But some officials have contended that scarce Federal transportation funds would be better spent on other big-ticket transit projects, like a Second Avenue subway line connecting the Bronx to Wall Street and Brooklyn, or a rail freight tunnel from New Jersey or Staten Island to Brooklyn that could reduce truck traffic in the city.
''The information on it that I've seen is not sufficient justification to spend that kind of money, in my opinion,'' said Representative Jerrold L. Nadler, a Manhattan Democrat who favors building the freight tunnel to Brooklyn.
