James Dao is an avid cyclist who commutes year-round, several times a week, from his home in New Jersey to The New York Times, where he is the editor of the op-ed page. He oversees production of the daily page, the Sunday Review and the op-ed section of the New York Times International Edition. Over the course of his 25 years at The Times, Mr. Dao has been deputy editor of the National and Metropolitan desks, a national correspondent, Washington correspondent and Albany bureau chief. In 2011, he was the reporter on a multi-media series about an American Army battalion’s experiences in Afghanistan titled “A Year at War” which won an Emmy and an Alfred I. Dupont-Columbia award for new media journalism. He is a cum laude graduate of Yale College, where he majored in history. He is married, with three children.

Mr. Dao regularly competes in Cat 4 and masters racing events. In 2013, he covered the Tour de France for The Times, writing 10 pieces during the final week and a half of racing on topics ranging from the tour’s crazy fans to the art of descending Alpine passes to the cycling-obsessed scientists who try to monitor doping from a distance.

Overseeing the daily domestic op-ed page, the Sunday Review, INYT op-ed section and NYT op-ed online.

This was a very strongly, clearly written piece by someone who was staking out what we felt was a very principled position that deserved an airing

The person contacted me through an intermediary … several days ago … who I trust and know well
They told me that there was this individual in the Trump administration who was very interested in writing an op-ed, and would I want to see it?
I almost always say `Yes, I’m interested in looking at things, and we’ll take it from there.’
We were simply trying to abide by the standard that the Times in general would use when referring to someone who’s not named. 
I feel that we followed a definition that has been used by our newsroom in the past.
very small number of people within the Times who know this person's identity
we have taken a number of special precautions to protect the person's identity.
There's editing in everything we do
this is a coincidence
we felt it was a very strong piece written by someone who had something important to say and who's speaking from a place of their own sense of personal ethics and conscience. That was our main focus.
we do make an effort to check the facts for all the pieces.

I don’t think they are expecting immediate change, but there’s a sense that things have gone off track long enough that there was a need to speak out now. And quite honestly, I’m not sure that this person thinks that this is a game-changing event, that their one voice — that perhaps others will speak out next. Perhaps they won’t. I don’t know what they think will happen. I came away from this piece feeling that this was someone who earnestly felt these things and earnestly felt that they had a need to come out.
I felt that way about it, absolutely
