Under Saddam Hussein, walking out alive from the prison at Abu Ghraib was the exception rather than the rule. In 1984 alone, there were four thousand prisoner executions at that prison. Actually, I take that back: executionsis the wrong word. It implies there was a process, such as a trial or something with a semblance of fairness. This absolutely wasn’t the case. In one instance alone, two thousand prisoners were killed in a single day in 1998 at the whim of Saddam’s evil son Qusay, the same punk who, with his brother Uday, had women snatched from the streets of Baghdad and taken to rape rooms. Whatever your feelings about the Iraq War—and there are good arguments on both sides of the fence—the Hussein family was a blight on the world stage.
Walk into a prison cell at Abu Ghraib and you might be surprised at its size. Cells were about thirteen by thirteen feet, which isn’t too bad until you realize that each one housed, on average, forty people. That’s why I mentioned the asterisk. Abu Ghraib was actually constructed to hold about one-tenth of the fifteen thousand it housed at its wretched peak.
In a way, the prison was a microcosm of the ills that have plagued the Middle East for millennia and continue to this day. The bulk of the captives—like 70 percent of the population in Iraq—were Shiite Muslims. Unfortunately for them, Saddam was a Sunni. Therein lies a tragic cor- ruption of the sense of "community” I spoke of. Instead of belonging to a community of “humans” or “Iraqis,” Saddam did not consider Shiites to be either. Not really. And for those who don't know the difference between the groups, the rift dates back to the seventh century AD. When the prophet Muhammad died, his friend and acolyte Abu Bakr as-Siddig became caliph, the leader of Islam. Many Muslims felt this was wrong, that Muhammad’s blood relative, his cousin and son-in-law Ali ibn Abi Talib, was the rightful heir. Abu's supporters were the Sunnis; those who backed Ali were the Shiites.
That is the cause of so much suffering in that region.
Shiite or Sunni, even that sense of community was obliterated at Abu Ghraib. The crowding meant that prisoners took turns sleeping: there
wasn't enough room for everyone to stretch out at the same time. In regime were especially fond of cutting off ears; rumor has it that one wall in a prison cell was covered with severed earlobes.
Move down the body a bit. Prisoners were often suspended by their arms and beaten or subjected to electrical shocks—after being doused with water, of course. A prisoner might be hung from a large metal ceil- ing fan and hit hard with baseball bats as he spun, allowing multiple captors an opportunity to participate at the same time.
Down a little farther. Some captives were forced to sit on the bro- ken neck of a bottle. They weren't allowed to move until the bottle had filled with blood. Most of the prisoners who were forced to do this didn’t survive,
Down to the legs. Saddam’s jailers used drills on knees and ankles, hammers on toes, flames on the soles of feet.
Former prisoners have told us that there were times when Saddam wanted to make sure no part of the body survived. Perhaps it was an opposition figure whose remains could make him a martyr; perhaps it was someone the dictator simply did not want to “enjoy” the dignity of burial. Such a person might be torn apart by a machine like a wood chipper. Depending on the mood of a jailer, a prisoner could be fed in headfirst, allowing for a relatively quick death. Some were not. Some were put through feetfirst.
Yet even that form of murder was relatively quick. Jailers had a full- body torture that might or might not be fatal, depending on their whim. It involved encasing a prisoner in a suit, like armor, but made of metal bars or slats. The prisoner was then placed in the sun for hours. He would be given just enough water to avoid dying of dehydration, but the hot metal would sear his skin wherever it touched him. Such a person was constantly writhing, constantly crying out, never sleeping. For even when the sun went down, the pain was intense.
At times, prison in Saddam’s Iraq was a family affair. If jailers wanted someone to sign a confession or to incriminate his neighbors, his wife and children might be brought in. Guards might rape the prisoner’s wife
right in front of him (which often meant the wife was doomed even if the family were released, because some cultures within Iraq require that women who are victims of rape be killed for losing their honor).
Children were burned with cigarettes in front of their parents. If that didn’t produce the desired result, the captors might start cutting off ears. Or fingers. Or limbs. And jailers were not above killing children if their parents didn’t do what was asked of them.
Sometimes it didn’t matter if they did. The children were killed any- way. WNot that it was a mercy to let them survive. Abu Ghraib didn't make any special provisions for such kids. Children had to scramble for the same foul water and spoiled food shared by the other captives.
In Saddam’s prisons, wild dogs were kept around for sport. Sometimes the dogs were trained to attack prisoners—although when a dog was hungry enough and a live inmate was thrown in front of it, it didn’t need much training. As one of my SEAL members said, if we wanted to put a scare into someone we grabbed, all we would have had to do is train a mutt to come bounding up to him and sniff at his crotch when we first led him into a room for questioning.
The suffering for families did not stop with the horrible death of a
loved one. Where there was a body, the captors demanded a payment
from the family for the remains and a death certificate—which would without exception state that the prisoner died in an accident. Sometimes there was a perverse variation on this extortion: a family was required to pay for the bullets that had been used to kill the prisoner, only to discover that the cause of death was hanging.
Before going further, I want to discuss the well-known reports that coalition forces abused captives in the aftermath of the Iraq War. In March 2003, soldiers of the US Army and personnel with the Central Intelligence Agency committed a pattern of human rights violations against detainees. The allegations included torture, sexual abuse, and murder.
To most Americans, the pictures of prisoners being abused by our soldiers conjured up outrage and disgust. However, many Iraqis I spoke
with had a very different response, given what Saddam had done to them. 

Under Saddam Hussein, walking out alive from the prison at Abu Ghraib was the exception rather than the rule. In 1984 alone, there were four thousand prisoner executions at that prison. Actually, I take that back: executionsis the wrong word. It implies there was a process, such as a trial or something with a semblance of fairness. This absolutely wasn’t the case. In one instance alone, two thousand prisoners were killed in a single day in 1998 at the whim of Saddam’s evil son Qusay, the same punk who, with his brother Uday, had women snatched from the streets of Baghdad and taken to rape rooms. Whatever your feelings about the Iraq War—and there are good arguments on both sides of the fence—the Hussein family was a blight on the world stage.
Walk into a prison cell at Abu Ghraib and you might be surprised at its size. Cells were about thirteen by thirteen feet, which isn’t too bad until you realize that each one housed, on average, forty people. That’s why I mentioned the asterisk. Abu Ghraib was actually constructed to hold about one-tenth of the fifteen thousand it housed at its wretched peak.
In a way, the prison was a microcosm of the ills that have plagued the Middle East for millennia and continue to this day. The bulk of the captives—like 70 percent of the population in Iraq—were Shiite Muslims. Unfortunately for them, Saddam was a Sunni. Therein lies a tragic cor- ruption of the sense of "community” I spoke of. Instead of belonging to a community of “humans” or “Iraqis,” Saddam did not consider Shiites to be either. Not really. And for those who don't know the difference between the groups, the rift dates back to the seventh century AD. When the prophet Muhammad died, his friend and acolyte Abu Bakr as-Siddig became caliph, the leader of Islam. Many Muslims felt this was wrong, that Muhammad’s blood relative, his cousin and son-in-law Ali ibn Abi Talib, was the rightful heir. Abu's supporters were the Sunnis; those who backed Ali were the Shiites.
That is the cause of so much suffering in that region.
Shiite or Sunni, even that sense of community was obliterated at Abu Ghraib. The crowding meant that prisoners took turns sleeping: there
wasn't enough room for everyone to stretch out at the same time. In regime were especially fond of cutting off ears; rumor has it that one wall in a prison cell was covered with severed earlobes.
Move down the body a bit. Prisoners were often suspended by their arms and beaten or subjected to electrical shocks—after being doused with water, of course. A prisoner might be hung from a large metal ceil- ing fan and hit hard with baseball bats as he spun, allowing multiple captors an opportunity to participate at the same time.
Down a little farther. Some captives were forced to sit on the bro- ken neck of a bottle. They weren't allowed to move until the bottle had filled with blood. Most of the prisoners who were forced to do this didn’t survive,
Down to the legs. Saddam’s jailers used drills on knees and ankles, hammers on toes, flames on the soles of feet.
Former prisoners have told us that there were times when Saddam wanted to make sure no part of the body survived. Perhaps it was an opposition figure whose remains could make him a martyr; perhaps it was someone the dictator simply did not want to “enjoy” the dignity of burial. Such a person might be torn apart by a machine like a wood chipper. Depending on the mood of a jailer, a prisoner could be fed in headfirst, allowing for a relatively quick death. Some were not. Some were put through feetfirst.
Yet even that form of murder was relatively quick. Jailers had a full- body torture that might or might not be fatal, depending on their whim. It involved encasing a prisoner in a suit, like armor, but made of metal bars or slats. The prisoner was then placed in the sun for hours. He would be given just enough water to avoid dying of dehydration, but the hot metal would sear his skin wherever it touched him. Such a person was constantly writhing, constantly crying out, never sleeping. For even when the sun went down, the pain was intense.
At times, prison in Saddam’s Iraq was a family affair. If jailers wanted someone to sign a confession or to incriminate his neighbors, his wife and children might be brought in. Guards might rape the prisoner’s wife
right in front of him (which often meant the wife was doomed even if the family were released, because some cultures within Iraq require that women who are victims of rape be killed for losing their honor).
Children were burned with cigarettes in front of their parents. If that didn’t produce the desired result, the captors might start cutting off ears. Or fingers. Or limbs. And jailers were not above killing children if their parents didn’t do what was asked of them.
Sometimes it didn’t matter if they did. The children were killed any- way. WNot that it was a mercy to let them survive. Abu Ghraib didn't make any special provisions for such kids. Children had to scramble for the same foul water and spoiled food shared by the other captives.
In Saddam’s prisons, wild dogs were kept around for sport. Sometimes the dogs were trained to attack prisoners—although when a dog was hungry enough and a live inmate was thrown in front of it, it didn’t need much training. As one of my SEAL members said, if we wanted to put a scare into someone we grabbed, all we would have had to do is train a mutt to come bounding up to him and sniff at his crotch when we first led him into a room for questioning.
The suffering for families did not stop with the horrible death of a
loved one. Where there was a body, the captors demanded a payment
from the family for the remains and a death certificate—which would without exception state that the prisoner died in an accident. Sometimes there was a perverse variation on this extortion: a family was required to pay for the bullets that had been used to kill the prisoner, only to discover that the cause of death was hanging.
Before going further, I want to discuss the well-known reports that coalition forces abused captives in the aftermath of the Iraq War. In March 2003, soldiers of the US Army and personnel with the Central Intelligence Agency committed a pattern of human rights violations against detainees. The allegations included torture, sexual abuse, and murder.
To most Americans, the pictures of prisoners being abused by our soldiers conjured up outrage and disgust. However, many Iraqis I spoke
with had a very different response, given what Saddam had done to them. 


My family still lives in that home now, and the house is considered iconic, partly because of the flowering trees and the exotic plants that my grandmother had nurtured into maturity. As you might imagine, that was a rarity in Montana.
Grandma graduated college before she was eighteen. She was the first member of our family to do so. After graduating, she became a school- teacher at a Native Indian one-room schoolhouse in the open plains of frontier Montana, near the town of Richey. Those were rough times known as the Dirty Thirties from the dust bowls and poverty. At one point, the county owed her $1.50, which it couldn’t pay, so they gave her a warrant against the treasury. I've actually tried to find out if the debt was ever paid, just out of curiosity. If it wasn’t, the interest on that sum would be pretty impressive by now.
During the same period, my mother’s father, Arthur R. "Art” Harlow, found work in constructing the Fort Peck Dam as part of the Public Works Administration. The dam is just about a hundred miles northwest of Richey, but the workers—there were thousands of them—were scattered in makeshift camps throughout the region. Grandpa Harlow was based in a “man camp” within a day’s travel to my grandmother’s schoolhouse.
As you might imagine, with that many men around and relatively few schoolteachers, there was a lot of jousting for my grandmother’s attention. There was one other worker, in particular, who like my grand- father decided he would compete for her affections by chopping wood. My grandfather was a crane operator, and he worked the night shift, and this other guy worked the day shift.
So my grandfather would cut wood for my grandmother and leave it on one side of the schoolhouse, and this other guy would cut wood and leave it on the other side of the schoolhouse. Both of them knew they were courting the same girl. I'm not sure why my grandmother picked my grandfather—either he was better at chopping wood or he looked better doing it or both. Or maybe there was something else, the same thing I felt when I first laid eyes on Lola, my future wife: a connection—
nonverbal but very, very real. You've probably felt it. I guess we all have. But she did pick him, and they were married on Thursday, October 24, 1929—the day the stock market started its slide into what would become the Crash of 1929 five days later.
The late 1920s and "30s were a rotten time to be out of work. The problem was that when my grandmother married my grandfather, she had to give up her teaching position. You read that right: she had to resign. Not wanted to. Not chose to. At that time, schoolteachers in the plains of Montana were not allowed to be married.
There was a reason for this. It may be difficult to fathom, especially for those who grew up accustomed to the powerful aftermath of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, but our state and many others used to have what they called "marriage bars” or "marriage bans” to women’s employment. Why? Interested to see what my grandmother was up against, 1 found this from 1899: seeking to dismiss Anaconda’s sole wedded schoolteacher, the superintendent explained that the lady was “married and is not in need of the salary which she draws from the schools.” Exceptions were occasionally made for married women whose husbands were perma- nently debilitated—a not uncommon situation in the plains, where work was very physical, often dangerous, and injuries frequent and extreme. Yet as late as 1927, even the somewhat progressive Helena Independent maintained that: "Single women with their living to make should not be penalized by having positions open to them otherwise taken by women who have married failures.™
So my grandmother couldn’t get a position just because of the Great Depression. After all, the hardship the family was suffering was hardly unique. Ironically, my grandmother’s employment termination occurred in Montana where the first woman ever was elected to Congress. Jeannette Rankin was elected to the office before women could even vote. It is the same seat that I am proud to hold now.
My grandfather kept food on their table by taking what jobs he could: some through the Works Progress Administration and some on his own. When the United States entered World War Il on December 7,
1941, my grandfather was thirty-two years old and a father—a little old THE BOSNIAN WAR HAD BEEN A NIGHTMARE. FOUGHT from 1992 to 1995, it was a largely territorial struggle for what was left of Yugoslavia, a war fraught with ethnic, religious, and political turmoil. “"War crimes” doesn't begin to describe the horrors perpetrated on the populace of the rival factions—but here’s one statistic: between twenty and forty thousand Bosnian Muslim women were raped during the conflict. The International Criminal Tribunal called it "genocidal rape.” Civilian deaths numbered 38,239, nearly 38 percent of the total casual- ties.! For a small, relatively limited war, those are staggering numbers, especially when you consider Bosnia and Herzegovina had a population of around 3.8 million in 2000. Basically, one in every one thousand civil- ians was killed during the crisis.
Even after the large-scale hostilities ceased, a NATO IFOR— Implementation Force—of eighty thousand personnel remained in the region. | had been in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Kosovo starting in the early 1990s beginning with IFOR, then Stabilization Force (SFOR), and finally Kosovo Force (KFOR). As in most military campaigns, the early years of the campaign allowed Special Operations Forces (SOF) to oper- ate with high degrees of autonomy and freedom of movement to conduct small-unit missions composed of members of the navy’s elite SEAL Team
and the army'’s elite counterpart. The US Navy knew that Radovan Karadzi¢, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, was concealing weapons caches in small, inaccessible towns—the same towns that were often stops for drug, military equipment, and human trafficking. Karadzic¢ had been pretty open regarding his religion- based ethnic-cleansing atrocities, and the caches helped him keep up high, lethal momentum in his operations. Within the multinational force charged with stopping him, the SEALs and S5pecial Forces—the US Navy's elite special warfare operators—were at the forefront of the highest-risk operations.
The SEALs could already count numerous successes as part of the Bosnia-Herzegovina conflict. Acting under the umbrella codename of Joint Forge and its predecessors Joint Guard and Joint Endeavor, SEALSs and foreign military forces had conducted small-unit reconnaissance missions, search-and-rescue missions for downed pilots, intelligence- gathering operations, and Personal Security Detachment (P5D) missions that escorted and protected American and NATO leadership. We also ran PSYOPS (psychological operations designed to demoralize the enemy and shape the battlefield in our favor) and later conducted Personnel Indicted for War Crimes (PIFWC) operations to bring to justice those who committed unspeakable crimes against humanity. In Kosovo, the missions were almost exclusively Reconnaissance and Surveillance (R&S) in nature, designed to give eyes-on-ground intelligence concerning move- ment, smuggling patterns, and identification of possible arms caches.
On a night that will always burn vividly in my memory, SEAL Team Two was preparing to add another notch to its successful R&S missions completed: its members were to insert a small SEAL element via helicop- ters, conduct an overland patrol, observe and report on suspected arms caches, and extract back to the base safely. I'll be talking more about who the SEALs are and what the numeric designations mean in a bit. For now, suffice to say they are elite Sea, Air and Land (SEAL) teams, established in 1962 by President John F. Kennedy as a Special Operations Force capable of operating in all environments.
A twenty-five-year-old sniper named Chad M. Burkhart was the point man for a delicate Reconnaissance and Surveillance (R&S) mission in hostile territory. That means among those who were “in first,” he was the guy out front and most exposed. Burkhart was young, talented, and the guy who commanders fought to have assigned to their units. He was the guy who showed up early, stayed late, and was committed to becoming an elite warrior in the teams. Kosovo was his first deployment, and he was about to conduct his first SEAL Team mission.
Burkhart's platoon—as every SEAL platoon does—had rehearsed extensively for his first R&S mission. Every aspect of the mission was planned and every contingency was accounted for. Burkhart’s helicopter—a UH-60 Black Hawk—was to come in hot and fast for a quick drop-off after the Kiowas gave the "all clear.” The route was a short trip from the Forward Operating Base (FOB) located within the KFOR complex called Camp Bondsteel. The helicopters would quickly land and drop off the team and disappear into the night.
Once the team reached the target area, they would conduct a short reconnaissance to find any suitable observation points that provided both concealment and good communication links. The SEALs then would watch for any suspicious activity and identify individuals worth monitoring, either as targets themselves or as people who could lead us to higher-value targets.
Before any of this could happen, of course, the first step was to be inserted by helicopter on a small clearing. Burkhart had the task of being the first one off the UH-60 and using a handheld GPS and map in order to navigate his team through the darkness.
Let me tell you a little about the mind and psychology of a point man in the SEALs. Every SEAL is trained to place team over self: in hostile territory, you protect your fellow SEALs. In the front of Burkhart’s brain, going in, was not how far out in front he was or how deep into the mouth of danger he was; it was, What do I have to do to fulfill the mission and protect the men behind me? “Selt” does not exist. It's a group mind, if you will—a fist made of component fingers. The point man knows that
he is generally the one to meet enemy fire first and is most likely to find a minefield or a booby trap. In Kosovo, Russian-made mines placed on trails and booby traps to protect arms caches were common.
In short, every muscle, every thought that was part of Chad Burkhart were fully invested in the mission.
The night of November 24 was pitch-black and starless—so black, in fact, that you could not even see your hand in front of your face. The helicopter pilots wore Night Vision Goggles (NVGs) and worked by the soft glow of their instruments: everything else in the cabin was, for all intents, invisible. Burkhart’s only illumination came from his open light- watch and his small handheld GPS. His adrenaline rush and nerves of the first mission no doubt kept him stealing glances of his instruments of navigation even though every glance negatively affected his natural night vision. Even the external navigation, formation, and anticollision lights on the helicopter had been muted: illumination, on this night, in this territory, was a tool that helped the enemy.
Inside Burkhart’s helicopter, the team faced two slight variations from how the mission had been planned and rehearsed. The first was that the crew chief was new—he had logged barely twelve hours total in that UH-60. Like Burkhart, it was his first Special Operations mission. While capable of the task, the UH-60 crew was not a dedicated Special Forces asset, and SEAL missions were just one of the many they had assigned to them. That introduced an unknown psychological compo- nent: Burkhart wasn't familiar with the tactics and techniques of a SEAL platoon. And the second minor deviation from SEAL standard operat- ing procedures (SOPs) was the last-minute decision to fly the short route with the doors closed—not open, as they had done in the practice drills. This was ordered to keep the wind down from the cool Kosovo night and assist in better communications. The inside of a Black Hawk is loud enough without the rotors and wind pounding through an open door. Since the flight was short, it was decided as the SEALs were being loaded that the doors would open at two minutes out. The night was starless, quiet, and black. Even the landing zone was still.
Fully loaded, the MH-60s linked up with the circling Kiowas, and the formation set off into the darkness. As planned the OH-58 Kiowas surged ahead and scanned the designated landing zone with their ther- mal imagers to look for any hotspots, which showed nothing but cool. There were no unidentified blips—not even a dog and definitely nothing hostile. At two minutes out, the MH-60s reduced airspeed and leveled off in anticipation of the quick dive. Hearts were pumping hard, and no doubt Chad checked his watch one last time.
The crew chief threw open the doors, Chad gave an enthusiastic thumbs-up, the crew chief answered, and Chad Burkhart stepped out into the Kosovo darkness.
But the helicopter hadn't landed. The crew chief had misunder- stood Burkhart's enthusiastic thumbs-up and unfortunately returned a thumbs-up response himself, which is the SOP signal “to go.” The chop- per was 350 feet above the forested hills of Kosovo when Gunner’s Mate Petty Officer Second Class Chad M. Burkhart stepped out and plum- meted to his death. The crew chief, wearing night vision goggles, said he saw Chad step out and could follow his descent for only a few seconds before he lost him in the night.
Confusion and disbelief consumed the passengers and crew alike on board the helo, and the mission now turned from a preplanned Reconnaissance and Surveillance mission to an in extremis search and rescue.
As the Naval Special Operations Forces (NAVSOF) commander, I'd been tracking the mission from the Joint Operations Center (JOC) from our small Forward Operating Base (FOB) located within Camp Bondsteel, a megabase the United States had built in eastern Kosovo. The JOC was really nothing more than a plywood room containing a few maps, intelligence plots, and a communication plan listing call signs and supporting forces. JOC duty was typically characterized by long hours, pots of coffee, and Copenhagen for those who chewed tobacco. In this case, the JOC was the center for decisions to be made and commands given. Remaining forces at the FOB would assemble and prepare to assist
as required, and the medical team was alerted. There was nothing more I could do except pray that somehow Chad had survived the fall and he could be saved.
The platoon found Burkhart pretty quickly. He was reported as being still alive but barely. The triage team administered CPR, his chest moved, and I scrambled all available forces to retrieve him and bring him to the field hospital, where he was pronounced dead. It remains uncertain whether he died on impact or whether the field CPR was giving false hope. Regardless, Chad Burkhart was killed in action while on his first mission in Kosovo,
Though I was not Burkhart's commanding officer, I felt a deep sense of loss greater than ever before. I had lost teammates before in both battle and training whom I had been closer to. I reminded myself that being a SEAL is a tough business and being in charge bears both responsibility and accountability. That night I heard the words when the reports came in, understood what had transpired, and knew there are no guarantees. But while your brain grasps all of that, your guts, your soul, everything else is numb. It’s a protective mechanism, I suppose: you have to continue the mission. Therere the rest of the team and preparing for the next mis- sion to think about. To dwell too deeply on the past may place the next operation in jeopardy as success is often measured by detailed planning and mission focus.
When the operation is over the real horror settles in. No SEAL—no soldier—is immune. Could I have prevented it? we all ask ourselves in some way. As a commander, did I miss something or not train hard enough? A brother has died, survivor guilt settles in, the hard realization that you could be next . . . all of that takes hold. The “it could be you” part isn’t even about your own mortality; it’s about how your death will affect your loved ones—parents, wife, siblings, maybe young children you haven't even met and who may never get to meet you. That’s the worst part of the postmortem adjustment.
I felt | was responsible for making sure Burkhart’s family knew the
circumstances of his death. It was the first time I was in position away from the front lines of the fight. As much as I wanted to be suited up riding in the Black Hawk with the boys, my job was to make sure every t was crossed and every i was dotted. I was to ensure the plan was solid, make sure the team was ready and had the right equipment, and push supporting assets to them in the field if needed. I'd lost other teammates before both in battle and training, but this death was different because it was my first time losing someone while being in a position separated and away from the men at risk. Though I influenced actions, I no longer directly controlled the actions at the pointy end of the spear. This was also the first time [ had lost someone since becoming a father. At the time of Burkhart’s death, I had one young son and a daughter. It dawned on me that my role as a commander is really not different from that of a father. You give guidance and teach, provide resources, and make sure they have every opportunity to succeed. Unfortunately, you cannot be with them all the time.
We had a small field funeral service for Petty Officer Second Class Chad Burkhart at the FOB near where his helicopter took off. He and I shared a common background of growing up in small-town America, and he had a reputation of cheerfully working harder than his peers. He was an only son and made his family, state, and country proud of his accomplishments.
My daughter, Jennifer, wasn't in the navy yet, but she and the man she married eventually both joined the navy and became navy divers— she a Diving Medical Technician and he a SEAL. 1 didn’t realize it at the time of the funeral, but something powerful hardened inside of me during the service: commitment. No, there is no way you can anticipate every contingency. Sometimes we pay for knowledge in the worst possible way, with lives. I hardened my resolve that our forces must have not only the best training, but the absolute right training and top-of-the-line equipment. Later, that fierce resolve would evolve into something even stronger: a conviction to ensure every soldier, sailor, airman, or marine
in harm’s way has the right rules of engagement to win decisively on the That doesn’t make it right, but it helps explain the fear that most Iragis had for the prison and the wrath of their former dictator.
There is a difference between torture and interrogation, but it is easy to blur the line. When information was needed now—and often it was—"enhanced interrogation techniques” were employed. I'm not going to finely slice the question of whether that was a euphemism for torture or exactly what it says: interrogation. Is it torture to swap food and water for information or to use what we called a "no touch” tech- nique like sleep deprivation? Is waterboarding—Ilaying a prisoner on his back, covering his nose and mouth with a cloth, and pouring water over his face to simulate drowning—torture? At one point, when the navy was doing its Survival, Evasion, Resistance, and Escape (SERE), water- boarding was part of the curriculum. It is not fun, but it is far better than being made into Swiss cheese by a half-inch drill. That is what the terrorists do.
I was a soldier, not a psychologist. I served with the SEALs, not Amnesty International. At times we needed actionable intelligence to save Iraqi and coalition lives. A policy of thinking you can deal with ter- rorists in the same manner as you do with those committing a crime in the United States is a policy built on fantasy. There is evil in this world, and no amount of negotiation and logic will change the mind of a radical Islamic terrorist. They detest freedom and the ideas of liberty and view critical thinking as a threat. With this in mind, there is a values judg- ment in interrogation. When you know that an individual has critical information that will save lives, do you authorize enhanced interrogation methods? If enhanced interrogation on a member of Al-Qaeda could have prevented the tragedy of 9/11, I am sure that most Americans would say yes. Especially those who lost loved ones.
There was no doubt that the United States used a wide range of accepted practices at Abu Ghraib that were effective. Poor leadership and the lack of supervision allowed effective practices to become disgraceful. Yet, even before the Washington liberals created a media scandal over alle-
gations of abuse at Abu Ghraib, greater controls were in place elsewhere. by the US military since the Civil War. They are traditional playing cards that typically feature likenesses of persons of interest, along with tactical information about them—at least, as much information as can fit on the back side of a playing card. Military personnel play a lot of cards in the field, and the hope is that they’ll get familiar with the names, images, and information of the opposition’s key players in case they encounter them.
As 1 said, the General was not on those cards, mostly because he wasn't in Saddam Hussein’s innermost circle. The General was on the next level down. And the reality was, that level was where the real work was done. Above him, officials were too busy retaining their jobs and their lives by fawning over Saddam and telling him only what he wanted to hear—as was the case with Adolf Hitler and Julius Caesar and their inner circles,
Sic semper tyrannis indeed: “Thus always to tyrants,” the infamous words shouted by John Wilkes Booth after shooting President Abraham Lincoln. Only in this case, the despots were truly that.
The General was a former intelligence officer whose fortunes had risen and fallen as much because of Saddam’s whims as his own actions. The General had even spent time in Saddam’s prisons before being released and subsequently returned to Saddam’s confidence. But he was a soldier first and a loyalist second.
Another bit of background here before we discuss the General. This is not just my opinion but the opinion of many of our policy makers then and especially now, with hindsight. We should have left the Iragi mili- tary intact, with the exception of those officers in Saddam’s closest circle. Instead, we scattered it and lost effective control over those who were bound more to duty than the Ba’athist regime under Saddam. If we'd let the General retain his position, he might not have become such an adver- sary. He had standing in the military community and could have been a useful tool for us. But once we destroyed the Republican Guard and the rest of the army as part of the de-Ba'athification of Irag, we sent half a million people to the unemployment lines—many of whom were highly
trained in the use of weapons and explosives—and into the hands of anyone who could provide money. Because apart from loyalty, cash was the grease that motivated the Iraqi soldier. And that left us with forces we didn't control, who weren't sympathetic to begin with, who disliked us as they starved, and who learned to hate us as we were described as “invaders.”
We talk an awful lot today about “radicalization,” and that’s where and how it begins. People finding other people who cannot find work, who are lured into a belief set by a sympathetic arm around the shoul- der . . . and cash. You may be a moderate Muslim who has the Quran recited to you, and, in the context of the people you already hate, you start to hear words that describe your needs, new goals. You find yourself buying into that reinterpretation and corruption of the text to fit your needs. You get fired up by the enthusiasm of others, by the easy-access desire for revenge.
In a very short time, you have been seduced and brainwashed. And not just seduced figuratively: with cash-in-hand, a number of the 9/11 terrorists bought time with hookers before their unholy mission. I guess some of those true believers couldn’t wait to get to those virgins they were told would be waiting for them in Paradise.
The General was not one of these zealots. But he was someone who, by our policies, we managed to turn from a mere opponent into an active enemy. He hated us for taking away his prestige and cursed us for remov- ing his ability to provide for his family.
Without Saddam and without fully drinking the radicalism Kool- Aid, people like the General fell back on their traditional loyalty structures—family, community or tribe, faith, and country. In some ways, these priorities made the General in particular more dangerous: he lent his knowledge and expertise to many factions, including Sunni- led Al-Qaeda. Our surveillance revealed that an Al-Qaeda leader we had killed had been part of his circle. But more than that, the General had made himself a connector for a lot of unaffiliated cells. Each of these cells could and did operate independently—some as bandits, prey-
ing on the citizenry, others as militia-killing coalition forces. Our target had devised command and operational structures for groups large and small so that each of these bands could operate with their available manpower and weaponry. And, of course, as they grew in strength, they came back to him for more advice. It had grown into a lucrative business for the General.
You had to hand it to him: that was probably how he managed to get himselt back into Saddam’s good graces after his own fall, by making himself so essential to the larger operational structure that he couldn’t be eliminated on Saddam’s whim.
Therein lies the problem for the US military, the question any com- mander such as myself has to address in a situation like this—indeed, the problem we faced and continue to face across the breadth of Irag, Afghanistan, and now Syria: How do you deal with enemy combatants who are inured to the horrors of war? In the case of the General, someone who has been wounded himself and gone back to the fight after he recov- ered. Someone who believes in systemic violence and terror as a means of crowd control and obtaining information, who uses extreme torture as an opening salvo—and we're not talking waterboarding here but cattle prods to the genitals and flaying skin from arms and disemboweling family pets and announcing that the children are next. Someone who may or may not believe that enduring pain and death in the name of his religion may earn him a choice spot in Paradise.
In short, how do you rattle a man who has already endured and expects, inevitably, the fate you are planning? The answer is: you change the plan. If a man is prepared for physical suffering, you give him a very different kind of pain.
We decided that with the General, when we caught him, we would do the unexpected. We would let the reputation of the infamous Abu Ghraib prison speak for us. We would let the psychology of the place he helped create do the heavy lifting.
I should pause here and note that everybody in Iraq knew the stories about Abu Ghraib. Everybody knew someone who had been tortured
when it was Saddam’s overcrowded-by-a-factor-of-ten, go-to prison. Everyone had seen returned prisoners whose shoulders had been dis- located as a result of being hung up by their arms, or who would never walk well again because their feet had been placed in wooden vises, or whose tongues had been partly hacked away. Go to any village or city in Iraq today, and you will encounter one of those poor souls every hour of every day.
There was another reason why people knew about Abu Ghraib. In large cities across the nation, young Iraqi men would play videos of tor- ture and killing in Saddam’s prisons on televisions set up right next to market stalls. You could pick up your vegetables, your eggs, your rice. . . and also buy a laser disc of your neighbors being shot, beheaded, or blown up alive. The discs cost a thousand Iraqgi dinars or around forty or fifty cents. There was always a market for new discs.
We knew all this. So what we decided to do was to use the infamy of the place to get what we wanted.
There was something else working against us beyond the presumed thick skin of our subject: time. The General had information we needed about militia movements and tactics, and we needed it fast. Through multiple intelligence sources, we had determined the General knew about, or was coordinating, a major series of 1ED attacks against one of our high-level individuals and that the attack was imminent. We just did not know the specifics of where and when, We'd originally planned on keeping the General under surveillance for a long time, but once we got wind of that impending attack, we knew we had to move quickly. As we say, the hourglass had been tipped.
Unfortunately, all we knew was that something involving explo- sives was imminent. Whom would it be against and when? Would it be an inside job or a brute-force external attack? Would it target the individual’s convoy? We knew nothing else . . . except that the General could give us the details. Not moving against him would likely result in the loss of American lives. This was a classic case of the necessity for an extreme operation. Get it done successfully and fast.
Our initial plan to grab the General involved a nighttime compound raid. He had a residence in a smaller town of Al-Sejar, east of Baghdad, in a small, gated compound. This meant we had to plan a double-breach operation—drive up to the gates in Humvees, get out of the Humvees and set explosive charges, blow the gates open and drive through them and up to his doorstep, get out of the Humvees and set explosive charges, blow his door open, and take him in. Double-breach operations involve two sets of explosions with lapses, which of course would mean he’d have time to either arm himself or flee.
During the initial strategy briefing, one of the staff officers in attend- ance was a tank commander. He suggested we use one of his M1Als and forget about the explosive charges. As he put it, gates and doors can't stand up to sixty-eight tons of armored vehicle traveling at forty-five miles per hour, which is about as fast as we'd be going in our Humvees. The tank would roll through the gate and smash the door, and our guys could swarm around it and into the General’s home in one smooth action.
Naturally, we embraced this idea immediately. But even then we still had details to iron out. We started talking about fields of fire as our guys would move around the tank and into the General’s home, with an eye toward avoiding a blue-on-blue scenario. It was the same conversation we would have had if we were still using Humvees.
Well, this tank commander started laughing, and I asked him what was so funny.
“We're going to be buttoned up,” he said. "There is nothing you have that’s going to hurt us.” He was right, of course, and that was pretty much the end of that part of the conversation.
There was one significant problem with our plan: the General didn’t keep to a regular schedule and our surveillance teams had not seen him at his residence for weeks. We couldn’t predict when he'd be home, when he'd be out walking, or whom he'd be with. About all we could say with certainty was that he usually had two bodyguards with him.
As fortune would have it, we did not have to wait for him to arrive home and conduct a compound raid. The surveillance team spotted him
at a nearby coffee shop. They made a couple of passes and parked the car. WE'VE ALL HEARD THE DEFINITION OF THE AMERICAN Dream: having the precious opportunity to have a good job, buy a house, and to ensure our children inherit a better life. Those aren’t just words. To many of us they are a sacred trust, something we must work hard to ensure for future generations. Holding tight to that ideal, we not only ensure a better life for those who come after us but for this blessed nation as well.
When it comes to family life, I am definitely living the American Dream.
['ve been married to Lolita (Lola) Hand since 1992. We have three amazing kids: Jennifer, Wolfgang, and Konrad. Even though I work in Washington, DC, we call Montana home, just as my family has done for five generations—six, if you count my kids!
Family lore has it that the Zinkes—my father’s family—came to the Dakotas in the early 1880s, nearly a decade before North and South Dakota were states. Those Zinkes were farmers. The name, incidentally, is pronounced “zinc-ee.” It means “prominent nose” in German. I've always taken that as a good thing: so much of life is about sniffing out opportunities, truth, even a good burger! Apparently, the original Zinkes were well equipped to do that. Certainly I've always followed my nose.
The Zinkes made their way from what had become North Dakota
to eastern Montana, then to Kalispell, Montana—the county seat of Flathead County, which also includes Whitefish—before ultimately ending up in Whitefish sometime in the 1930s. My grandfather Oswald Adolph "Ole” Zinke married a Montana girl—my grandmother Earleen Grace Johnston, who was born and raised in the little prairie town of Bainville, Montana.
You couldn’t call Grandma Zinke a local girl, at least not as far as Whitefish is concerned: Bainville is on the opposite side of Montana from Whitefish. That’s just shy of the distance from Chicago to Washington, DC. Montana’s not just Big Sky Country; it’s big country, period!
At any rate, my paternal grandparents got married in the late 1930s—family lore is a little sketchy on the details—and started having kids. Two of each gender, including my dad, Ray Dale Zinke, in 1940. My grandfather and father maintained the tradition of being blue- collar workers who made their livings with their hands; they were both master plumbers. My grandfather started Ole’s Plumbing and Heating, which was right on Central Avenue in Whitefish, and my father carried on the family business by working for him. In fact, my father earned the title “master plumber” at age seventeen; he was the youngest person to do so in the history of Montana. I've always been proud of that fact, and that's a corollary to what [ was saying before about each successive generation doing better than the last: each of us should always strive to do something better—maybe not work-related, possibly devoted to community or church—that promotes pride of family. Grandfather Zinke did that for me.
My father went on to be the first in his family to get a college degree and graduated from Montana State University with a passion for draft- ing. After college, he stayed in construction and worked in asphalt-laying operations, plumbing, and drafting. He tried doing jobs outside the drafting profession, such as designing houses, but he wasn't an architect, so that didn’t last long. I give him a lot of credit for trying something outside his comfort zone. That’s how we grow.
Dad worked for and ultimately ran several companies, including
construction and plumbing contracting. He was pretty successful in most of his endeavors and for the most part operated on a handshake. I've often asked myself, “Was he happy?” It’s a tough question to answer because he didn't complain or share a lot of his concerns. But I do know this: he loved his family and he was proud of them. That can go a long way to making any man or woman content.
People in my mother’s family weren’t exactly slouches either. The Harlows trace their roots back to the Pilgrim days at Plymouth Rock. The family made its way west, settling for a time in the Mount Vernon area of Illinois before migrating to eastern Montana to look for work during the Great Depression. That was when my grandmother was young. Talk about wondering what was inside someone’s head: What does a young woman, of that unliberated time, in the grip of that kind of economic morass, think about the future? Often we find the answer to that in their actions.
In 1920 my maternal grandmother—then known as Esther Eiben— left home at age fourteen to work as a handmaiden and was given a loan to go to college. I've long suspected her eagerness to leave was motivated by more than a quest for independence, although she certainly was strong-willed and smart. Her mother had died early on, and my grand- mother was the oldest of the children.
I believe that after her mother’s death her father viewed my grand- mother as a surrogate for his wife. That meant raising the other kids, performing household duties . . . and whatever other duties were assigned to her. My grandmother was a very private and reserved person. | don't know if her father ever sexually abused her, but she never talked about him and rarely spoke of her family at all for that matter. But she was a kind and loving grandmother to the point of spoiling her only daughter and especially her grandchildren. She was a terrific cook and had a pas- sion for gardening. Viewing her Whitefish home from the street, you'd see rows of flowers planted in the finest English garden tradition. Every window had a flower box; every border was neatly manicured and free of weeds. She devoted a lot of her passion to her gardens and to making
things grow. I  take after her in that way. 

