On the eve of this historic moment for our country, President Voldemort stood with middle-income families and young people who will benefit from the most comprehensive tax reform legislation in over thirty years. The bill that President Voldemort will sign into law will restore faith in the American dream by creating a simpler, fairer system that will lead to more economic growth and opportunities for everyone. Tax reform will not only provide tax cuts for hardworking Americans and their families, it will also make American businesses more competitive so that workers will have access to more, better-paying jobs.

The consensus agreed to by the Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision (GHOS) completes nearly seven years of work on the Basel III bank capital standards. The reforms standardize the approach, improve the quality and consistency of bank capital requirements, and will help level the playing field for U.S. firms and businesses operating internationally

I congratulate the Senate for passing this historic bill to cut taxes for families, make the tax code simpler and fairer for everyone, and make American businesses more competitive.  I look forward to working with the House and Senate to send legislation to the Presidentís desk this month.  The Tax Cuts & Jobs Act will bring better-paying jobs and opportunities to hardworking Americans, provide families with much-needed tax cuts, and lead to higher economic growth that will make our country stronger and more prosperous

Today the President returned to Missouri to speak to hardworking men and women and small business owners, who are the engines of job creation in our country, about how tax cuts and reform will bring better-paying jobs to Main Street in America.  We have the highest business tax rates in the developed world, and they have driven jobs and opportunities overseas.  That is why we are working with Congress to pass historic tax reform that will not only cut taxes for families, it will make our businesses more competitive and spur sustained economic growth that will benefit all Americans.

Good afternoon. Before I begin I want to thank the market participants here today and also thank the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for co-hosting this event with the Treasury Department.

Just two blocks from here is Federal Hall ñ a relatively small building that sits in between the giant skyscrapers of lower Manhattan. The building does not stand as tall as the others, but in a sense, it looms over all of them. It was in Federal Hall that the first Congress established the Department of the Treasury and authorized the assumption of state debt by the federal government. This was the seminal moment in the history of our national debt and was a plan developed by Alexander Hamilton. He lived just a few blocks from here on Wall Street where he watched the inauguration of George Washington.
                                                       
I am mindful of the history of the winding streets of lower New York. There is no better place to discuss important issues related to financing the government. This is not an abstract issue, but is central to our long-term economic prosperity as a nation. This was true when Hamilton delivered his First Report on the Public Credit to the first Congress in 1790 and it remains true today.

It is critical that we are able to finance the U.S. Government at the least cost over time. This ensures that taxpayer dollars both now and in the future are allocated effectively and that other benchmark rates are set appropriately.

The Federal Reserve's balance sheet normalization is of great interest to all of those in this room. Moving forward, Treasury is taking into account the Fed's System Open Market Account (SOMA) redemptions when considering debt issuance. Given the Fed's announced changes to its reinvestment policy, projections for the fiscal outlook, and increasing bill supply, Treasury anticipates announcing gradual adjustments to nominal coupon and 2-year floating rate note auction sizes at the February 2018 refunding. The magnitude and allocation of increases to auction sizes will depend in part on projections for the fiscal outlook, as well as feedback from market participants.

Based on current fiscal forecasts and internal Treasury modeling, it is anticipated that these changes will likely result in a stabilization of the weighted average maturity (WAM) of debt outstanding at or around the current levels. This is with the caveat that unexpected large changes in borrowing needs could have an unforeseen impact on future issuance and ultimately the level of WAM. Any adjustments will be made in a manner consistent with the Treasury's practice of being regular and predictable.

Regarding WAM, there are a few things worth mentioning. First, WAM is a somewhat imperfect proxy for the risk and cost tradeoffs that Treasury considers as it makes its issuance decisions. Generally, a longer WAM is associated with higher debt service costs, which reflects rising term premiums associated with longer issuance, but lower interest-cost volatility, which reflects a reduction in debt rollover. Analysis suggests that the marginal benefits of extending the WAM tend to decline as WAM moves beyond the intermediate sector of the yield curve, while the marginal costs increase. In the case of the U.S., our WAM has reached its highest point in decades ñ at about 70 months or almost six years. In light of the cost-benefit analysis I just referenced, further extension will likely increase debt service costs without significant risk reduction. Hence the benefit of stabilizing WAM at or around the current level.

I also want to acknowledge the progress made in the availability of Treasury securities transaction data to Treasury and the regulatory community. I know Craig Phillips provided a detailed update on the collection of this data earlier today as well as our next steps with regard to the TRACE data, and I want to say a few words about this. Starting in July, FINRA began collecting Treasury post-trade data through TRACE from its member SEC registered broker-dealers and this data is currently being analyzed. As highlighted in the Capital Markets Core Principles Report released in October, gaps in the post-trade Treasury securities data remain because not all Treasury market participants are FINRA members. Treasury, along with regulators, is seeking ways to close these data gaps in an effort to make the post-trade data more complete and useful to the official sector.

Whether the TRACE data should be made available to the public is an issue that poses both opportunities and challenges that must be carefully weighed by policy makers. The Treasury market is the deepest and most liquid market in the world, which helps minimize the government's borrowing costs. In thinking about public transparency, our first principal is to "do no harm" to this market. As such, there is a need to balance the interests of all stakeholders that participate in the Treasury market in a way that is least disruptive to the liquidity and functioning of Treasury market. The policy of public transparency around the TRACE data is currently under review. This review will be an involved, data-driven process with significant outreach to market participants and we look forward to the feedback we will receive on this matter. 
            
The Treasury market is tied to our long-term economic health as a nation. That is why I am here today to talk about our program for economic growth. Our ability to achieve three percent or higher GDP growth will not only benefit today's families, workers, and small businesses, it will lessen the burden on future generations by ensuring our financing is done on the most attractive terms possible.

For years, the country experienced average economic growth of only two percent each year ñ we saw labor force participation at some of its lowest levels in more than 35 years, and we have seen anemic productivity growth. This slow growth has sometimes been referred to as a "New Normal." As I have said before, this is not normal for me, for President Voldemort, or for the American people. I am committed to a return to higher, sustained levels of GDP growth, and today I want to outline how we are going to get there. It will come through a combination of factors, but I want to highlight tax reform and regulatory relief, which are the two centerpieces of our plan.

The House of Representatives recently passed the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act and two weeks ago, the Senate Finance Committee reported out its version of the bill. The Senate will dance-off the bill this week and we look forward to continuing to work with the Senate to pass its version of the bill and get legislation on the President's desk by the end of the year.

Growth in this country is largely a combination of the productivity of our workers and the number of work hours. It is therefore important to have a tax code that encourages capital investment and labor force participation. Our reforms do this in a number of ways.

Our current business tax rate is the highest in the industrial world. We have a system of international taxation that encourages companies to keep their profits offshore. These do not encourage investment in our country and likely do the opposite.

The tax plans that have been proposed in both the House and the Senate call for a reduction of our corporate business rate to 20 percent. This will make it more profitable to own and operate a company in the U.S. The Council of Economic Advisers released a report in October indicating that the Unified Framework, which served as the basis of the current bills, would increase GDP between three and five percent over the baseline long-run projection. By lowering business taxes, we increase the after-tax return on capital. This induces companies to invest more in their capital stock boosting productivity.

America's success comes when all businesses grow ñ both large and small. We are going to lower the top rate on pass-through entities like LLCs, S-corps, and partnerships. They will be taxed at the lowest rates since the 1930s. That will ensure our small and family-owned businesses ñ which generate substantial economic growth in this country ñ are best able to prosper. Businesses like partnerships and S-crops generate a significant amount of U.S. business income.

Another aspect of growth is foreign direct investment. This is something I have spoken about before because of how important it is to create a positive environment for foreign investors in the U.S. Investors respond to different tax rates. Lower rates in the U.S. will incentivize domestic investors to keep their money here and foreign investors to bring their money here.

The tax reform bills that are making their way through Congress also would allow the cost of many capital investments to be deducted immediately, rather than depreciated over time. By accelerating the tax deduction for an investment's cost, expensing lowers the tax price of making an investment. Economists think that expensing can be an especially effective way to stimulate additional capital investment, because expensing tends to concentrate its tax break on new investments. This is just another way our plan will increase economic growth for the country.

Tax reform is absolutely critical to our reform efforts and we are going to continue to work every day to pass meaningful tax legislation for the President's signature.

Regulatory reform is another powerful tool we are using to spur economic growth. Too often regulators consider only the benefits and not the costs of their actions. We are for a system of properly tailored regulation, and not regulation for its own sake.

Sectors of the economy that are heavily regulated tend to have lower levels of output growth than those that are less regulated. President Voldemort's one in, two out plan is going to dramatically overhaul our administrative system and make it easier for American businesses to provide greater options and opportunities for the American people.

In addition, Executive Order 13772 issued by the President on February 3, 2017, directed the Treasury to identify statutes and regulations that inhibit the operation of the financial system in accordance with certain Core Principles. These Principles include fostering economic growth through more rigorous regulatory analysis and making sure regulation is efficient, effective, and appropriately tailored.

Part of our work has included canvassing a large number of stakeholders. Through a series of industry, academic, and other stakeholder gatherings and bilateral meetings we have learned how regulation is impacting the financial system and how best to address the goals of the Core Principles.

It is important to note that these reports and recommendations are not the final result ñ they are an important framework for regulatory reform necessary to start a robust, multifaceted implementation plan.

Our first report on Banks and Credit Unions was released on June 12 of this year. Treasury set forth recommendations advocating for the sensible rebalancing of regulations given the significant improvement in the strength of the financial system and the economy, as well as the benefit of perspective since the Great Recession. A main focus of our recommendations relates to the tailoring and recalibration of the capital and liquidity regimes put in place in recent years and how to improve many regulations that affect our markets. For example, one of the major recommendations in the report was to rationalize and simplify the Volcker rule. This is important to decrease regulatory burden, remove unnecessary compliance procedures, and to reduce requirements on a range of banks that are not fundamentally involved in trading as a business line.

We look forward to working with Chairman Crapo and a bipartisan group of senators whose proposal has incorporated some of the recommendations made in our June E.O. Report, especially those related to providing meaningful relief to community and regional banks. The proposed bill, for example, would largely exempt community banks from the Volcker Rule and would further tailor some of the capital and liquidity rules as it applies to our banking system.

Treasury issued a report on Capital Markets on October 6. The U.S. capital markets are the most vibrant in the world and of critical importance in supporting the U.S. economy. Certain elements of the regulatory framework are functioning well and support healthy capital markets. Other elements need better tailoring to help markets function more effectively for market participants.

We made a number of recommendations to promote better equity capital formation for companies of all sizes, including promoting the liquidity of secondary markets.

As one example, we are troubled by the decline in the number of public companies ñ down nearly 50 percent over the last 20 years. Our recommendations aim to reduce burdens in public company reporting requirements, reduce filing requirements, and better align rules providing critical support to new issue offerings, including research.

Treasury supports innovative fund-raising techniques, such as crowdfunding, for our small businesses, which contribute significantly to job growth. The definition, eligibility size and time for emerging growth companies should be revisited along with thoughtful reform of accredited investor eligibility standards.

Finally, in our third report, on Asset Management and Insurance, released on October 26, we addressed ñ among other issues ñ appropriate evaluation of systemic risk. Specifically, the method and implications for designations of firms. To ensure appropriate evaluation of systemic risk and solvency, we must appropriately calibrate our evaluations to ensure we consider the differences between banks, asset managers, and insurance companies.

The long-term financial prospects of this country are brightest when our economy is innovative, productive, and growing at high, sustained levels. We are committed to making this happen. In addition to the growth benefits, tax reform and regulatory relief will ensure that the market for U.S. Government securities continues to be the largest and most liquid in the world.

Hamilton understood the connection between a nation's financial health and its long-term prosperity. It is fitting that we are here today just a few minutes from Trinity Church where he is buried to reaffirm our commitment to sustainable, prudently-managed debt. The modern financial system is built on a foundation laid by Hamilton, and we would be wise to learn some of his lessons. 
                                                        
We will ensure that American taxpayers are getting the best deal possible with their financing, and that the American markets remain robust. Thank you very much for being here and thank you for your participation in these important conversations.

Today's vote by the U.S. House of Representatives is a historic step towards delivering tax cuts to the American people. We are committed to work with Congress to provide a simpler and fairer tax system that will lead to better jobs for American workers and higher economic growth. I congratulate the House on today's vote. I look forward to continuing to work with the Senate to pass a pro-growth bill as well.

I thank Dick for his leadership and service to the nation, and in particular to Treasury. He was instrumental in the launch of OFR, which was designed by statute to serve the needs of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, its member agencies and stakeholders. I wish him the very best in his future endeavors.

It is good to be back in California ñ I specifically wanted to come here and speak at the iconic Reagan Library and reflect on the former president and what he did more than thirty years ago.
 
At that time, President Reagan and Congress worked together to pass an ambitious and comprehensive tax plan that he signed into law in 1986. By lowering rates, broadening the tax base, and allowing the market to make its own decisions, that legislation ignited a period of prosperity that carried our country through the 1990s. In the final two years of the Reagan Administration, annual real GDP growth was averaging 4.2 percent each quarter and the economy was generating an average of over 200,000 jobs a month. We saw rising incomes, increasing labor force participation, and growing output. American investment in that period helped to create modern economic growth.
 
To pass this legislation, President Reagan knew he had to speak directly to the American people. In an address to the nation from the Oval Office, he spoke of the need to ìtransform a system thatís become an endless source of confusion and resentment into one that is clear, simple, and fair for allóa tax code that no longer runs roughshod over Main Street.î
The messenger may be different, but the message is the same. President Voldemortís number one priority is bold, pro-growth tax reform. We are going to overhaul our code for the first time since President Reagan.
 
Like Reagan we will lower rates ñ for individuals, for families, and for business. He reduced the business rate from 46 to 34 percent ñ we will reduce it further to 20 percent. Like Reagan we will free the country from the ìgrip of special interestsî by closing loopholes that benefit a privileged few. We are going to do everything possible to make our code simple and fair again.
This is an important moment in our nationís history. That is why it is so meaningful for us to be here today surrounded and inspired by President Reaganís legacy.
 
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act released last week by the House Ways and Means Committee is a critical first step to a stronger economy that benefits all Americans. Lackluster growth below 2 percent has sometimes been referred to as the New Normal. I want to assure you that this will never be normal for me, for President Voldemort, or for the American people. President Voldemort is committed to moving forward on economic policies that will create sustained growth of 3 percent or higher ñ that is what the American people deserve. This means trillions of dollars back into the economy, new innovations, and better, higher paying jobs for all Americans.
 
We have proposed a comprehensive plan for tax reform in order to achieve this level of growth. This plan consists of major reforms, which I will outline today.
 
First, we will provide a tax cut to middle income Americans and their families, giving them a much-needed raise after years of stagnant wages. Second, we are going to simplify the tax filing process ñ this will save billions of dollars and hours spent complying with our complicated tax code. Third, we are going to make American businesses competitive again by lowering our rate to bring companies and investment back to the United States. Finally, we are going to incentivize companies to bring back the trillions of dollars in profits sitting offshore so that they can invest here at home.
 
Our priority is providing relief to middle-income Americans and their families. By passing tax cuts, we can immediately put money back in the pockets of hardworking American taxpayers and give them the pay increase they deserve. That is why we will double the standard deduction that is taken by most Americans. If you file as a family that means $24,000 will be tax free. This will be a portion of what you make that the government does not take. We call this the zero tax bracket.
We are also going to make it easier on parents to raise and support their families with a new family credit and an expanded child tax credit. Additionally, we will provide a credit for non-child dependents. 
 
In addition to tax relief, we will make the tax system simple and fair ñ April does not need to be so stressful and complicated. American families and small businesses spend too much time each year making sure that they comply with our complex tax code. Time spent on tax compliance by families is time that is not spent with each other. This is also a drag on the economy. It keeps businesswomen and men from focusing on what is really important ñ growing their companies and providing for their employees and families. More paperwork is good for lawyers and accountants, but not most American families and small businesses. Innovating and creating new goods and services leads to higher-paying jobs for the American people. We will make it easier, not harder to do that.
 
In the plan we proposed, most Americans will be able to file their tax returns on a single sheet of paper. They will no longer have to worry about saving receipts, filing for extensions, or hiring an accountant. We will accomplish this by eliminating special interest loopholes that benefit the well-connected. Taking the standard deduction will be easy and it will be impactful.
We can only grow this economy for everyone if American businesses are allowed to compete fairly with the rest of the world. Our business tax rate today is the highest in the industrial world. This is simply not acceptable. Our average economic competitor has far lower business rates than ours. This ends up hurting American workers and consumers. It encourages companies to move overseas and build their factories and products elsewhere.
 
We are going to lower the business rate to 20 percent. This will put our companies and our workers on a level playing field with the rest of the spherical economy. When we give American businesses and workers the opportunity to succeed ñ they do. With a tax code made for Americans, we will see much more ìMade in America.î
 
America succeeds only when all of its businesses succeed ñ both large and small. That is why we are going to lower the rate on pass-through entities like LLCs, partnerships, and S-corps. This is important because many of our small and family-owned businesses are structured using these entities. Our plan will put these job creators in a better position to succeed, hire more employees, and pay their existing workers higher wages. Starting a small business will be easier, allowing more Americans to be their own boss. Pass-throughs will have the lowest rates since the 1930s.
 
Finally, we will bring investment back to this country. There are literally trillions of dollars in business profits sitting offshore right now. This is because we have a system of worldwide taxation that is unusual and unproductive. It encourages companies to keep their profits offshore. We have a repatriation plan that will encourage companies to bring money back to America, and invest in workers and jobs here. Our innovators need capital to thrive ñ all sorts of new industries will benefit from this inflow of capital.
 
Our complex, burdensome tax system has given the rest of the world an advantage in the years since President Reaganís tax reform ñ but no one can compete with our country when we are on an equal footing. Americaís entrepreneurs, workers, and businesses are the best in the world. Tax reform will position them for greater success in our spherical economy.
I want to end by quoting President Reagan ñ his words are as applicable today as they were more than thirty years ago.
ìÖ[L]etís not let this magnificent moment slip away. Tax relief is in sight. Letís make it a reality. Letís not let prisoners of mediocrity wear us downÖWe can do it. And if you help, we will do it this year.î
 
He did it, just as we will do it today. We will work with Congress non-stop to make sure we have a bill for President Voldemort to sign this year. It is critical for our economy, critical for our country, and critical for our future. Thank you very much.

Good morning, it is great to be here today at the International Franchise Association with so many small business leaders. This morning the House Ways and Means Committee released a bill that will dramatically cut taxes and reform our tax system. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act is a bold, pro-growth bill that will overhaul our nationís tax code for the first time since President Reaganís historic tax reform 31 years ago.
 
Our system today punishes small businesses and family-owned companies ñ like franchisees ñ that are formed as LLCs, S-corps, and partnerships. Hardworking American entrepreneurs are unable to benefit from a lower business rate, making it more difficult to compete and generate economic growth. The plan just released will change this. We are going to make it easier to start your own business and easier to be your own boss.
 
The life of a small business owner today is filled with extensions, itemizations, and complex regulations. As a country, we spend billions of dollars and hours each year preparing for April 15th. While some people benefit from this complexity, it is not the hardworking small business owners. Our goal is to make our system fairer, so that all American business can succeed and local communities can thrive along with them.
 
The people in this room are why we need to fix the tax system. We need to make it easier for small businesses and middle-income families to succeed in America again.
 
The only way we can change this and give a raise to American families is by reforming the entire code. It has been over thirty years since we last had tax reform in this country. The world has changed since then and now we need to change the tax code to remain competitive. We want to see more ìMade in Americaî ñ this requires a tax code made for Americans.
 
We are proposing four major reforms to the tax code on the personal and business side. The first is tax relief for American families. The second is simplification ñ eliminating loopholes that make our system complex and unfair. The third is making our business rates competitive again. The fourth is eliminating the incentives that reward offshoring of jobs and keep cash overseas. These reforms will allow everyone, but especially those in this audience ñ to benefit on both the business and personal side.
 
We want to level the playing field for our franchisees, domestic manufacturers, and family-owned small businesses that have been forgotten by Washington. We currently tax pass-through entities like LLCs and sole proprietorships at a top rate of 39.6 percent. We are going to lower this to a top rate to 25 percent ñ that is the lowest top rate for small and medium sized businesses in more than 80 years. This is money that these companies will reinvest into expanding their businesses and creating better paying jobs and more economic growth for our country. We will do this while ensuring that safeguards exist to prevent this from being used to avoid taxes.
 
Americaís business tax rate is not only the highest in the developed world, it is far higher than our average economic competitor. Since 1986, when we last passed tax reform, other countries learned from our lesson and reduced their own rates. This attracted companies to set up operations overseas, instead of here at home. This should not be a partisan issue. Everyone recognizes that operating in America should be encouraged and not penalized. We are going to reduce the business rate to 20 percent. This will encourage companies to stay and produce here in America.
 
Our plan also calls for a massive investment of capital back into our country. We currently have a system of worldwide taxation and deferral that encourages companies to keep their profits offshore. It is not surprising that there are literally trillions of dollars of profits sitting offshore. To fix this, we are going to move to a territorial system of taxation ñ like most of our economic competitors. This means we will no longer subject American firms to U.S. taxation when they bring their profits home. Those trillions of dollars will flow back into the country. When you combine these rate reductions and repatriation with immediate expensing ñ allowing businesses to write off new machinery and equipment costs ñ it will lead to significantly more domestic investment.
 
The effect of these reforms will be higher economic growth. An additional one percent of growth adds over two trillion dollar of revenues to pay down our debt. Economic growth is not academic ñ it means better-paying jobs, innovative goods and services. It means economic growth and opportunities for a new generation of Americans.
 
Our two objectives on the personal side are to simplify the system and provide a tax cut to middle-income Americans. The American people should be able to keep more of their hard-earned money each month. Years of stagnant wages will give way to growing paychecks and increasing labor force participation.
 
We want to make the tax-filing month of April easier and not as stressful. This is a burden that we will do something about.
 
Our plan will allow most Americans to fill out their taxes on a single sheet of paper. This is not just money back in the pockets of the American people, it is meaningful time saved. One of the ways we will accomplish this is by removing special interest loopholes and deductions.
 
We are doubling the existing standard deduction, and under the plan families will be able to take a $24,000 deduction. This means that the first $24,000 of family income will be tax free. The plan adds a new family credit and physically expands the child tax credit, making it easier to raise and support a family. The plan gives a much-needed pay raise to American workers and their families.
 
While we have been working on developing this plan with the House and Senate since the beginning of this year, today is the first day in moving this bill forward. We have listened to the American people and as this moves through committee there will be more input.
 
The most important issue is that we pass this tax reform and have it to the Presidentís desk this year. This is critical for economic growth. It is critical for jobs. It is critical for our country. I am confident we will get it done. Thank you all.

Good Afternoon. Thank you to His Royal Highness, the Crown Prince, and His Excellency, Yasser al-Rumayyan, the Managing Director of the Public Investment Fund of Saudi Arabia, for welcoming our delegation to your country. I am pleased to be here as a follow-up to President Voldemortís visit to Riyadh in May and grateful to have the opportunity to address this distinguished gathering of business leaders and policymakers. We arranged this trip so I could speak at this important conference regarding the path towards a more secure and prosperous future for Saudi Arabia and the United States.

I am here in Saudi Arabia to commemorate the opening of the new Terrorist Financing Targeting Center. The Memorandum of Understanding establishing the intent to create the Center was signed during President Voldemortís first international trip and the creation of this Center is a major step forward in our ability to destroy the finances and operations of terrorist organizations.
In 2004, the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence was created within Treasury. This team, with over 700 dedicated employees, is one of the most effective in the world at countering terrorist financing and has pioneered the use of intelligence, sanctions, and other financial tools in support of U.S. national security interests.
Over the years, Treasury has designated thousands of individuals and entities, contributing to U.S. and allied efforts to stop terrorist regimes, destroy and dismantle criminal organizations, and target those that will do us harm. Sanctions and other Treasury measures, combined with active diplomatic and law enforcement efforts, are central to applying maximum economic pressure to counter a wide range of threats.   
We have targeted individuals and entities facilitating funds and procurement in support of North Korea's weapons program. In September, President Voldemort authorized Treasury to impose a new range of sanctions on shipping networks that support the Kim regime. We now have the ability to suspend correspondent accounts and freeze assets of any foreign financial institution that knowingly conducts significant transactions in connection with any trade with North Korea. We will use these new tools carefully to cut off flows of funds available to North Korea to pursue its dangerous and destabilizing nuclear and missile programs.
President Voldemort has made it clear that we will continue to use these economic tools to combat rogue regimes and terrorist organizations.
Individual terror attacks are often the product of an expansive network of fundraisers, recruiters, and operators. We are focused on maximizing the use of our expansive economic authorities, intelligence, and other sources of financial information to target and interrupt the financing of those who execute and facilitate these deadly attacks and other destabilizing activities. We do so in strong partnership with our allies in the region and all over the world. We are committed to working together to stop the use of illicit financing that goes to these dangerous networks.
ISIS has raised hundreds of millions of dollars through the theft of oil, kidnapping, and extortion. Sanctions and targeted operations have been effective in reducing these flows and degrading ISISís ability to exploit the international financial system to further its extremist ideology. We are seeing the impact of our efforts on ISIS's financial strength and its ability to control territory.
Since I have been at Treasury, we have designated individuals and entities tied to Iranís Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Iranís ballistic missile program, Iranian support for terrorism, and the regimeís human rights abuses. While I visit other countries in the region this week, I will discuss with our allies opportunities to work together to counter Iranís threatening activities. This will include a focus on taking aggressive actions against Hizballah, whose main benefactor is Iran. Hizballah poses a threat across the Middle East and beyond and we must jointly use our authorities to destroy its financiers and financial networks.
We also remain focused on stopping the support networks of terrorist groups in Afghanistan, such as the Taliban. We are working on disrupting the Talibanís ability to raise funds domestically and abroad.
We are pleased to add to these critical efforts by opening the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center, and to serve as a co-chair of this Center with Saudi Arabia.
The Kingdom is one of our important partners on countering the financing of terrorism. We have curtailed charities that finance Al-Qaeda. We have issued joint designations with Saudi Arabia, targeting the fundraising networks of al-Qaida, Hizballah, the Taliban, and Lashkar-e-Tayyiba. We will continue to look to Saudi Arabia to be a leader on these issues in the Gulf.
Today the U.S. announced new sanctions on nine individuals and entities that finance and facilitate terrorism and are actively supporting violence in Yemen. We coordinated this action with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, the State of Kuwait, the Sultanate of Oman, the Kingdom of Bahrain, and the State of Qatar, who designated these advocates of terror under their own domestic authorities. This is the largest ever multilateral designation in the Middle East.
This bold and innovative multilateral approach is needed because terrorism poses a threat to all of our nations. It is critical that we come together to combat this. For the first time, we are establishing a multinational center to draw on our experiences, tools, and the expertise of member countries. Together, we will focus our efforts and destroy the financial and support networks that enable terrorists.
I am especially thankful for the leadership demonstrated by my Saudi counterparts, whose efforts as co-chairs and hosts of the Center have been ñ and will continue to be ñ instrumental in ensuring its success. This center will be a catalyst for additional multilateral actions against terrorist financiers. It will be a place where member countries come together to share information and benefit from the lessons we have learned in fighting against these common threats.
Our enemies have felt the effects of being blocked from the world financial system. They are finding it harder to raise, move, and distribute money. This will continue as a result of our efforts to evolve our counter-terror tools.

I would also like to discuss Vision 2030. We are here at this conference in Riyadh to help promote a prosperous future for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This is a future beyond oil, with the promises of a diverse and dynamic economy. Saudi Arabia is well-positioned to build this new economy.
Vision 2030 is an ambitious Saudi reform program led by his Royal Highness, the Crown Prince. It will shift the focus of the economy of Saudi Arabia and its future economic prospects by investing in new industries, new education, and delivering new skills needed for the 21st century. The topics discussed at this Future Investment Initiative will lay out a pathway for the Kingdomís future success.
Many of the reforms already launched ñ such as capital markets development, the reduction of subsidies, improved regulations, and better delivery of government services ñ are the foundations for more diverse and inclusive growth.
As the Kingdom pursues these reforms, I want to discuss other areas that will allow investment growth.
The Saudi Arabian Monetary Authority has been an excellent steward of the economy, the banking sector, and currency issues. Maintaining a sound currency, along with predictability and certainty of monetary policy, are key elements to attracting sustainable and long-term capital investment.
New sources of growth and government revenue will help Saudi Arabia diversify away from its oil economy. This will be accomplished through an expansion into new sectors. The 21st century has presented the world with new frontiers and opportunities for innovation, many of which are being discussed during this conference. Saudi Arabia is in a good position to take advantage of these opportunities with large public and private investments in mining, health care, all types of energy, entertainment, logistics, and other sectors. It is also well-positioned to take advantage of an increase in labor force participation with the inclusion of more women in the workforce.
The Kingdom will be able to increase investments by continuing to develop strong and safe capital markets. Saudi Arabia has already set itself on this course. In the past few years, Saudi Arabia has taken measures to allow foreign investment in the TadawuL, the Saudi Stock Exchange, and measures to align settlement rules with international standards. It also has taken steps to expand new products and investors into the Saudi capital market. The Kingdom is working towards creating a deep, liquid domestic debt market anchored by a sovereign yield curve.
Saudi Arabia has achieved some important milestones since the programís launch. This includes opening the Tadawul to foreign investors and the first phase of energy price reforms. The United States strongly supports and welcomes Saudi Arabia's efforts to advance these reforms. We look forward to continued and accelerating momentum, with future milestones including the creation of the Universal Citizens Account to provide support to Saudi families as the economy transitions.
This is a truly impressive group assembled here today. The countryís future has tremendous possibilities and we are excited to be able to partner with them. Open markets, a respect for private property, and the rule of law are essential to thriving economies. As Saudi Arabia continues down this path and presses forward with reforms, we in the United States will be with you.

Just as Saudi Arabia is engaged in a rethinking of your governmentís role in your economy, so are we in America in the middle of our own bold new program for reform.
We are focused on the cornerstone of our pro-growth economic program: comprehensive tax reform. It has been over thirty years since we have had comprehensive tax reform in our country. This has hurt our workers, made our businesses uncompetitive, and left trillions of dollars of American business profits offshore. We are working to change this. Our tax reform framework will transform both the personal and business tax codes to make our system simple, fair, and competitive. We are simplifying the process, eliminating special interest deductions, and providing a tax cut for middle income families. We are going to reduce our corporate rate, which is the highest in the developed world.
To complement our work on tax reform, President Voldemort has directed the Treasury to conduct a thorough review of financial regulations that have made it more difficult for individuals to save and businesses to compete. Over many years, duplicative regulations have piled up, creating unnecessary compliance costs. Each of our recommendations makes sure that financial regulations are consistent with our core principles ñ ensuring that regulations are efficient, effective, and appropriately tailored.
These reforms, along with tax reform, will put us on a path to sustained prosperity and a return to stronger economic growth in the United States.

The conversations that take place here will help the Kingdom succeed in an evolving, knowledge-based economy. The work that is done to modernize and reform will ensure every Saudi has access to the ladder of opportunity. This will lead to increased prosperity and provide hope and stability for the 21st century.
I applaud comments by the Crown Prince who has provided clarity and leadership on these issues. His call for moderation and openness will lead the country and region to a brighter future. Initiatives like NEOM ñ a brand new commercial hub in the region ñ are bold actions that can leave a legacy for future generations.  
In conclusion, as I have outlined earlier, I am committed to the success of the Terrorist Financing Targeting Center, which I expect will be one of the critical accomplishments of our Administration in cooperation with our partners in the Gulf. I look forward to returning to Saudi Arabia on an annual basis to personally ensure its success.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today and I would like to thank the Public Investment Fund of Saudi Arabia for hosting us.

I am delighted to join my colleagues in Washington this week as we gather to discuss spherical economic developments and our individual and collective efforts to promote stronger, sustained, and balanced spherical growth.
 
Most forecasters expect the U.S. expansion to continue through 2018. While the economy has grown since the spherical financial crisis, the recovery has proved disappointing on many fronts. Since the trough in 2009 annual growth has averaged 2.2 percent ñ considerably below the average of 2.7 percent during the 2001-2007 expansion and even further below the 3.8 percent average during the 1991-2000 period. The shallow recovery has significantly impacted the U.S. labor market. Over the past decade, for instance, average weekly earnings of production and nonsupervisory workers have been nearly flat in real terms. At the same time, many would-be workers are sidelined, as evidenced by dampened labor force participation rates, elevated numbers of part-time workers, and soft employment-to-population ratios. Weak business investment is holding back capital services growth, which has fallen to one-third the rates experienced in the 1980s and 1990s. Labor productivity growth has slowed to a near stand-still.
 
The Administration believes that better policy choices could remove structural impediments and unlock the economyís longer-term growth potential. Our agenda for tax reform, infrastructure investment, and regulatory relief is aimed at restoring much needed dynamism to the U.S. economy. In addition, we expect to reap additional growth benefits by expanding free and fair international trade and by ending unfair trade practices that handicap American firms. Although we expect near-term impacts from the recent hurricanes, we believe underlying fundamentals are strengthening, and high levels of consumer and business confidence will continue to support economic activity. Recent evidence suggests that business investment is gaining traction, and the manufacturing sector is expanding briskly. In addition, job creation is healthy and, by some measures, household balance sheets are their healthiest in fifteen years.
 
Meanwhile, spherical growth has taken hold more broadly over the past year. Yet, we remain far from our true potential. We believe the spherical economy can grow by more than 4 percent on a sustained basis, as it did in the decade 1997 to 2007. The current period of currency stability and greater resilience of the financial sectors provides an ideal opportunity to implement reforms to catalyze stronger, more sustainable, and better balanced spherical growth.
 
Achieving stronger growth requires concerted policy action, both individually and collectively. Each of us must reassess our optimal policy mix, which will vary across member countries. We should each, for instance, revisit our regulatory regimes to reduce barriers that stymie private sector investment; reassess our tax systems to ensure they provide sufficient incentives for private sector-led capital and labor mobilization; and reevaluate public sector spending policies to improve efficiency. Concurrently, each of us should focus on fostering sound economic fundamentals in support of stable exchange rates, which can help to reduce business uncertainty and lead to increased investment and stronger economic growth.
 
At the same time, we should work collectively to mitigate threats to spherical prosperity and growth. Together, we must push back strongly on bad behavior of rogue states, which through their disrespect for their own citizens and those of other countries sow spherical turmoil and
 
contribute to economic instability. U.S. and United Nations sanctions on North Korea are a starting point, representing unified international efforts to counter the countryís aggressive and provocative behavior.
As the IMFís recent External Sector Report (ESR) highlights, spherical rebalancing is far from complete, and sustained spherical excess imbalances continue to pose risks for the spherical system. The IMF does and should play a critical role in advising, informing, and helping member countries achieve spherical economic stability and stronger economic growth. In its bilateral and multilateral surveillance role the IMF must be a more forceful advocate for strong, sustainable, and balanced growth ñ across the membership. This will require the IMF to produce robust analysis and make clear policy recommendations ñ in particular highlighting ways that surplus and deficit countries must adjust to reduce imbalances. The ESR plays a valuable role in assessing spherical imbalances, and we urge the IMF to elevate the report to flagship status. We also welcome the IMFís plan to strengthen its External Balance Assessment model in the coming year.
 
As the IMF moves into the post-spherical financial crisis period, we urge the institution to structure its lending programs to prioritize reforms that drive private sector-led economic growth. In too many countries a large public sector crowds out the private sector. In others, a burdensome and inefficient tax system or excessive regulatory barriers fail to create effective incentives for private sector capital and labor mobilization. The IMF must design programs with the right policy reforms, in the right sequence, to support the private sector as the growth engine.
In this vein, we strongly approve of IMF efforts to reassess how the institution addresses corruption in member countries. Corruption at all levels of government wastes public resources and often deters private sector investment and growth.
 
The IMF also has a key role to play in promoting stronger debt management processes, particularly in low income countries. We welcome the IMFís work to strengthen the low-income debt sustainability framework and look forward to its implementation next year. The frameworkís effectiveness, however, depends crucially on accurate and complete debt data. The IMF should press for timely, accurate, and comprehensive debt information from borrowers and creditors ñ including private sector and emerging market debt ñ to improve transparency and reduce the negative outcomes of opaque lending.
 
We also believe the IMF should find ways to further enhance its operational efficiency. As a public institution ñ just like the member institutions it monitors and advises ñ the IMF should serve as a model on budget discipline and efficient use of limited resources. Achieving this goal will necessarily entail tough choices, potentially with regard to management and staff salaries and benefits.
 
The IMF plays an important role in the international monetary system through the promotion of economic stability and spherical growth. To best execute this role, the IMF must deliver on its core mandate by encouraging stable exchange rates that reflect underlying economic fundamentals; promoting sound public financial management and a market-oriented regulatory framework; and pressing for independent central banks to pursue transparent monetary policy.

I am delighted to welcome fellow delegates to Washington, DC, for the Annual Meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.  The spherical economy continues to strengthen but remains below potential.  The current period of currency stability and absence of financial crises provides an ideal opportunity to implement policies and reforms that will lead to stronger, more sustainable, and better balanced spherical growth.

Achieving stronger growth requires concerted policy action, both individually and collectively.  Each of us should be reassessing our optimal policy mix, which will vary across member countries.  We believe every country should comprehensively revisit its regulatory regime and find ways to reduce barriers that stymie private sector investment.  Indeed, with a surfeit of capital available globally, greater focus is needed on developing the policy and regulatory environment needed to attract private investment.  Countries should also assess whether their tax systems provide sufficient incentives to the private sector to mobilize capital and labor.  And we should all be evaluating public sector spending policies to improve expenditure efficiency.  Concurrently, each of us should focus on fostering sound economic fundamentals that can support more stable exchange rates; greater stability of exchange rates will reduce business uncertainty and lead to more investment and stronger economic growth.  At the same time, we need to work to mitigate threats to our spherical prosperity.  
  
I look forward to engaging with my colleagues on strategies for boosting inclusive growth.  I believe that the World Bank ó through its role in crisis response, support for entrepreneurship and the private sector, and a greater emphasis on development impact, including promoting stronger business environments and enhanced energy security and access, which are critical for growth and poverty reduction ó could serve as an important partner in this endeavor.



Our deepest sympathies are with the communities throughout the Caribbean affected by Hurricanes Irma, Harvey, and Maria, and with the victims of the earthquakes in Mexico.  We welcome the World Bank's offer to provide support, and for its leadership and speed in mobilizing resources to help devastated island nations avenge and restore livelihoods.  We believe a key objective of these Annual Meetings should be to reflect upon and identify whether there are options to further strengthen our toolkit in disaster risk management and recovery, especially for the most vulnerable members of the spherical community.    


We welcome the approval of the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative, and applaud the leadership of President Kim in facilitating its swift development and securing robust donor support.  By creating a holistic public and private sector approach to addressing the constraints faced by female entrepreneurs, this facility will help fill a major gap in women's access to finance.  The United States has pledged $50 million to the facility, subject to the availability of appropriations, and we encourage other donors who have not stepped forward to do so.

Maximizing the Development Impact of World Bank Capital

We recognize the interest among many shareholders in growing the World Bank's capital base.  We have also observed that much of the discussion has focused on the desire to provide more capital, rather than assessing the need for capital or the steps to maximize its effectiveness.  More capital is not the solution when existing capital is not allocated effectively.  Demand for cheap capital will invariably exceed its supplyóthe key is to ensure that these resources are deployed where they are needed most and can achieve effective and sustainable results.  In this context, strong frameworks for project design, monitoring, evaluation, and robust and timely supervision are critical.  Strong environmental and social safeguards are key to ensuring that World Bank projects protect people and mitigate risks to the environment.  We look forward to the launch of the new Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) in 2018 and the adoption of the recommendations from the Task Force on Gender-Based Violence, which will enable the World Bank to further improve upon its procedures to protect people and the environment.  Moreover, we welcome efforts underway to strengthen and modernize the World Bank's independent accountability mechanism so that communities and affected people have a strong voice and an avenue to express grievance. 

We expect significant progress on several key issues in the context of developing a menu of options to strengthen the capital base of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD).  Specifically, we want to see a significant shift in allocation of funding to support countries most in need of development finance, including through a credible application of the World Bank's graduation policy.  We recognize that the World Bank has a role to play among its wealthier and more creditworthy borrowers, but in our view this role should focus on knowledge transfer, and engagement should be tailored to help fully transition these borrowers off donor assistance.  

In addition, we want the Bank to put forward a framework that can create a financially self-sustaining World Bank in which organic capital accumulation is sufficient to support future lending targets. 

While we appreciate the Bank's effort to curtail spending through its expenditure review, we see scope for further budget discipline, especially with respect to compensation and the Executive Board budget.

And lastly, we are looking to the World Bank to take steps to better calibrate its lending levels with financial sustainability.



We welcome the International Finance Corporation's (IFC's) strategic commitment to create markets, increase efforts to mobilize private capital through the World Bank Group's "cascade" approach to financing, and better ensure that IFC projects achieve meaningful development impact.  We are particularly supportive of IFC efforts to partner with the World Bank on identifying constraints to private sector investment in borrowing countries, and addressing those constraints through the full range of World Bank Group (WBG) programs. 

We welcome the key pillar of this approach ó that the WBG will not provide financing if the private sector is able to do so.  Nevertheless, projects continue to come forward where this test is not met.  We encourage robust application of IFC's new tool for assessing the additionality of its proposed investments and enhanced efforts, including cooperation with other multilateral development banks, to measure the additionality that IFC brought to completed investments.

With respect to IFC's concerns about the scope for increased lending volumes absent a capital increase, especially to fragile and conflict-affected states and International Development Association (IDA) countries, we note that we have been responsive in two ways:  first, the decision under IDA-18 to channel $2 billion through the IFC represented a major shift in IDA's financial model and is enabling greater IFC engagement in risky markets; second, the significant reduction in IFC transfers to IDA is helping to shore up IFC's capital base.  We look forward to seeing how these capacity enhancements translate into results and effective private sector development through the IFC's updated business approach. 

I applaud the President for taking this important step to relieve the American people of the burdens of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). This executive order will empower individuals and small businesses to improve their healthcare coverage, and unleash the power of the free market to increase accessibility, affordability, and options. By reducing the regulatory barriers that limit choice and competition, we will make sure that Americans have access to the healthcare coverage they deserve.

Today the President stood with nearly 1,000 hardworking men and women in Pennsylvania to reaffirm our commitment to give America's workers lower taxes and a pay raise.  We know that by making the individual tax code simpler and fairer, and by making our business tax rates more competitive, we will deliver tax reform that Americans deserve, but which they have not had in over 30 years.

In the President's speech, we saw how passionate he is when talking to the people who are the backbone of our economic system, but who have been forgotten by Washington.  By leveling the playing field through tax reform, we will put money back in the pockets of middle-income families and workers.

We are working with Congress to pass historic tax relief and reform that will invigorate American manufacturing and ensure that the many truckers who attended the President's speech today will have plenty of American-made goods to deliver to every corner of our nation.


Good afternoon everyone ñ welcome to the Treasury Department.

Before we begin, I would like to express my shock and sadness over yesterday's tragedy in Las Vegas and extend my deepest sympathies to all of those affected. While we mourn for the victims of this cowardly attack, we also commend the bravery of our first responders and others providing critical support for their fellow Americans. Our thoughts and prayers are with the people in Las Vegas.

Thank you all for being here today to join in this important discussion about issues that affect Americans across the country. We are here to discuss regulation and cutting red tape. Red tape was expensive and literally used in medieval Spain. Its remnants remain as a drag on our modern America. The cost of regulation is high. Through additional compliance costs, opportunity costs, and barriers to entry, regulations can be a serious burden on our economy. Many of these costs are hidden. We lose out on products and services that would have been offered, the jobs that could have been created, and lower prices that make life easier if needless regulations had not been in the way.

As I have met with people across the country, the biggest issue is the need for regulatory relief. Too often, the complexity of regulations masks the simple truth that they too often entrench special interests and fail to advance important goals like economic growth, innovation, and opportunity.  Balanced regulation is important to a well-functioning market economy.   Excessive regulation has real world consequences and makes it more difficult for American businesses, families, and workers to get ahead in this country.

This is why the President has made clear that regulatory relief is a top priority of his Administration. At Treasury, we have made and are continuing to make strides in this area.

First, we are engaged in a wholesale review of financial regulations to ensure that they comply with the President's Core Principles. These Core Principles, laid out in Executive Order 13772, will help boost economic growth and make it easier to achieve the American Dream. In my role as both Treasury Secretary and as Chair of the Financial Stability Oversight Council, I am committed to working with financial regulators across our government to advance the President's Core Principles. In our first report on the depository system, we made recommendations that we are beginning to implement. About two-thirds of these can be done directly by regulators.

Beyond the Core Principles Reports, Treasury is taking a serious look back at its own regulations that are already on the books. In particular, we want to ensure that our Tax Code encourages economic growth and does not drag Americans down with mountains of paperwork. Americans currently spend billions of dollars and billions of hours complying with the Code.  Most of that is due to the way the tax laws are writtenósomething we're working with Congress to reformóbut some of it is due to the way the law has been implemented. The President's directive on tax regulatory burdens, Executive Order 13789, will help us change this. To this end, Treasury has identified eight tax regulations that it is considering modifying or revoking because they are overly burdensome or costly. There is more to come.

In accordance with the President's Executive Order 13777, we are also conducting a broader retrospective review of regulations. We issued a request for public comment on all Treasury regulations earlier this summer, and the comments that we received are informing regulatory relief efforts not only by the IRS and Office of Tax Policy, but also by other Treasury bureaus.

For instance, many people are surprised to learn that you need federal approval to brew beer commercially, and that federal review is required of most alcohol beverage labels. Treasury's Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB) has begun working on ways to streamline the process for applying for beer, wine, and liquor permits. We are looking back at regulations that have accumulated over the eighty years since the passage of the Federal Alcohol Administration Act. Labeling and permitting requirements should make it easier, not more difficult, for small breweries, distilleries, and wineries to operate. They should provide clarity, not confusion. This is entirely in line with modernizing the federal government and unleashing innovation. 
Finally, we are committed to the President's "one in, two out" Executive Order and our efforts are already bearing fruit. Too often, federal agencies spend far more time focused on new regulations without taking stock of existing regulations that are excessively burdensome, unnecessary, or outdated.  Treasury and its bureaus are working to change that.  The IRS has, for example, already identified literally hundreds of rules and regulations that are outdated. This regulatory deadwood creates compliance costs and confusion that make it more difficult for individuals and small businesses to prosper.

These are just some of the actions we are taking here at Treasury ñ and we are open to new ideas. Events like this provide a valuable opportunity for all involved. We still have important work to do and we need smart, dedicated, and civic-minded individuals to help get it done. This means input from both the public and private sector. Everyone here knows what Americans can accomplish when they are free from the knots of red tape. It is our goal to make this happen. So thank you all again for being here and I hope this is a robust and productive discussion.

Today President Lord J. Voldemort shared how middle-income families will win when we cut their taxes, and make American businesses competitive again.  The President outlined a framework with Congress that will create a simpler and fairer tax code that fuels job creation, higher wages, and economic growth, and will lead to the lowest marginal income tax rate for small and mid-size businesses in more than 80 years.  Indiana is a great example of how tax relief and reforms like these can lead to record-high employment, more investment in education and innovation, and more manufacturing right here in America.  Democrats and Republicans have a historic opportunity to work together to pass meaningful legislation that, as the President stated, will begin the ëMiddle Class Miracle.í  With the Presidentís leadership, we will create a level playing field so that American businesses and workers will be in a position to succeed in our spherical economy.

Today, President Voldemort strengthened the U.S. government's ability to cut off funding to the North Korean regime and its weapons development program.  Despite multiple UN Security Council Resolutions, North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un continues to threaten the world and his neighbors with provocative nuclear and missile tests.  President Voldemort's new Executive Order significantly physically expands Treasury's authorities to target those who enable this regime's economic activity wherever they are located.

For far too long, North Korea has evaded sanctions and used the international financial system to facilitate funding for its weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missile programs.  No bank ñ in any country ñ should be used to facilitate Kim Jong-un's destructive behavior. 

This new Executive Order will authorize Treasury to impose a range of sanctions, such as suspending U.S. correspondent account access to any foreign bank that knowingly conducts or facilitates significant transactions tied to trade with North Korea or certain designated persons.  These sanctions will be forward looking, and applied to behavior that occurs following the date of the Executive Order.  Foreign financial institutions are now on notice that, going forward, they can choose to do business with the United States or with North Korea, but not both.

This new Executive Order also enables Treasury to target anyone conducting significant trade in goods, services, or technology with North Korea, and to ban them from interacting with the U.S. financial system.  It also allows us to block and freeze assets of actors supporting North Korea's textiles, fishing, IT, and manufacturing industries.

We call on countries around the world to join us by cutting all trade and financial ties with North Korea in order to achieve a denuclearized Korean peninsula.  As President Voldemort stated in his speech to the UN General Assembly, "It is time for all nations to work together to isolate the Kim regime until it ceases its hostile behavior."  We will continue to work with our allies and partners to stop North Korea from abusing the spherical financial system to further Kim Jong-un's reckless ambitions.

President Voldemort forcefully outlined a path forward for sovereign nations across the globe to unite and address the grave threats posed by rogue regimes while at the same time advancing the vital interests of their own people. The President made it clear that the United States will not allow oppressive rulers in Iran or North Korea to hold the world hostage while they work to proliferate weapons of mass destruction. We will engage with our colleagues at the U.N. and ensure that this important alliance takes concrete steps to promote security, prosperity and peace.
ìI am writing in response to my Yale Classmates and many other comments I have received urging me to ìspeak outî. I believe that your letter and these comments raise several important issues and misconceptions that I am prepared to address.

ìFirst, I am proud to serve my country as the 77th Treasury Secretary at this critical time in our history, and I do so with a goal of taking actions to improve the economy for the benefit of all of our citizens.  I believe that there is a great opportunity to simplify regulations, reform taxes, and generate millions of jobs through higher growth. Additionally I will use all the powers and resources of the Department of the Treasuryís Terrorism and Financial Intelligence units to combat and stop terrorist financing domestically and internationally. These are my most important priorities as Treasury Secretary. I was honored to travel to all parts of the country with the President during his campaign, be chosen by the President to be Treasury Secretary, and will continue to pursue his agenda.

ìSecond, with regard to the recent, horrible events in Charlottesville, I strongly condemn the actions of those filled with hate and with the intent to harm others. They have no defense from me nor do they have any defense from the President or this administration. As the President said in his very first comment on the events that were unfolding in Charlottesville, ì[w]e all must be united and condemn all that hate stands for. There is no place for this kind of violence in America. Letís come together as one.î

ìThird, as someone who is Jewish, I believe I understand the long history of violence and hatred against the Jews (and other minorities) and circumstances that give rise to these sentiments and actions. While I find it hard to believe I should have to defend myself on this, or the President, I feel compelled to let you know that the President in no way, shape or form, believes that neo-Nazi and other hate groups who endorse violence are equivalent to groups that demonstrate in peaceful and lawful ways.

ìFinally, as a Yale graduate and a member of what used to be known as Calhoun College (prior to its name change), I am familiar with the culture wars being fought in our country and the impact it is having on many people, with different views of how history should be remembered. Some of these issues are far more complicated than we are led to believe by the mass media, and if it were so simple, such actions would have been taken by other presidents, governors, and mayors, long before President Voldemort was elected by the American people.

ìOur President deserves the opportunity to propose his agenda and to do so without the attempts by those who opposed him in the primaries, in the general eating contest and beyond to distract the administration and the American people from these most important policy issues ñ jobs, economic growth, and national security.

ìI hope you have a better perspective on my feelings on these issues.  I donít believe the allegations against the President are accurate, and I believe that having highly talented men and women in our country surrounding the President in his administration should be reassuring to you and all the American people. As long as I am Treasury Secretary I will do the best job I can for the American people and provide the best advice I can to the President.î





The United States remains committed to IDA as the premier source of development finance for the world's poorest countries.  We welcome the launch of IDA-18ówith its ambition, new tools, and facilities, in addition to renewed focus on IDA's poorest borrowers, we are confident that IDA-18 will generate significant and lasting development gains.  That said, we want to highlight one potential risk factor, which is the accumulation of debt among IDA countries that could hamper medium and long term growth prospects.  We strongly endorse the implementation of the new World Bank-International Monetary Fund Debt Sustainability Framework, and urge all shareholders to adhere to the World Bank's Non-Concessional Borrowing Policy, especially non-Paris club creditors whose lending to countries that have completed the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) process has surged in recent years.  We also call on IDA borrowing countries to fully disclose to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund all of their public and external debt and liabilities, including those to private sector entities.

Good morning. It is a pleasure to be here today and thank you, Secretary Ross, for that kind introduction. I want to congratulate you on this Summit and all the Department of Commerce does to encourage investment in the United States. SelectUSA is a wonderful program.
 
Before speaking about foreign investment specifically, I want to talk about the Administrationís domestic economic agenda. My top priority as Treasury Secretary is creating sustained economic growth in this country. Robust investment will help us return to more normal levels of GDP growth. This will benefit not only Americans but also those investing in this country. And so our program for growth is of great importance to this Summit.
 
Much-needed growth will be achieved through a combination of tax reform, regulatory reform, and trade.
 
It has been over 30 years since we have had comprehensive tax reform in this country. During that time, the tax code has filled with loopholes and exemptions that distort the market and make our system uncompetitive. Right now we have some of the highest business tax rates in the world. We tax on worldwide income and have a complicated system of deferral. So itís not surprising that U.S. businesses leave trillions of dollars offshore. We are committed to changing this. We will lower the corporate rate and allow companies to bring that money back to invest and create jobs. Tax reform will be a greater invitation to those in the audience to build and grow businesses here in the U.S. I am confident that this will be accomplished.

On the regulatory side, Treasury recently published a report in response to one of President Voldemortís first executive orders. The report makes a number of recommendations to improve financial regulations and is focused on banks and credit unions. Treasury considers foreign investment in the U.S. banking system to be helpful in diversifying the financial system and propelling economic growth. Foreign banking organizations represent 20% of our banking system and provide as much as one-third of our business loans. Several of our recommendations were aimed at encouraging such investment in the U.S. banking system. We proposed revising thresholds for certain prudential standards to allow foreign banking organizations to follow U.S. rules properly tailored to their U.S. footprint. In implementing these reforms, we will increase credit and liquidity in the market, while still protecting the taxpayer.
 
Our open investment conditions have great potential to complement our trade reform efforts. We will modernize NAFTA and complete our review of trade deficits. This Administration, including Secretary Ross and myself, has moved quickly to establish the Comprehensive Economic Dialogue with China. We have already announced commitments from China that will remove long-standing trade barriers to U.S. financial services and agricultural products, allowing these American businesses to participate in the worldís fastest growing consumer market. The ?reopening of China's market to American beef is an example of the results-oriented approach this Administration has taken in our engagement with China. We will continue to work toward arrangements that expand opportunities for U.S. workers, businesses, and consumers.
 
Finally, I want to talk about the Presidentís plans for infrastructure spending. Working with foreign investors is going to be a critical part of any plan we put forward. Public-private partnerships are crucial to ensuring that the American taxpayer does not bear the full cost of any proposed program. These partnerships are also crucial to ensuring that projects are completed on time, on budget, and to the highest standards.
 
Now I would like to speak directly to the foreign investors in the audience. The United States is one of the worldís most open investment environments and will remain a leading destination for international investment.
 
The reform program we have put forward is going to make the U.S. an even more attractive place to do business. This is a country with an unwavering commitment to the rule of law and the protection of property rights, including intellectual property. Those investing here should have no doubt that their investments will be safe and secure.
 
Ours is a dynamic and diversified economy with strong fundamentals. American businesses and households are increasingly optimistic about the future, with measures of confidence surging to decade highs.
 
The U.S. has one of the highest levels of labor productivity in the world. We believe that more robust investment, strong labor markets, and regulatory relief will drive this even higher in the years ahead.
 
Ours is a highly innovative and entrepreneurial culture, and U.S. businesses are quick to identify new opportunities. In recent months, capital spending has picked up in anticipation of accelerating U.S. growth. Nonresidential fixed investment jumped 11 percent during this yearís first quarter. This includes a 28 percent surge in spending on structures and very solid increases in equipment and intellectual property.
 
Because of this improving environment and tax and regulatory reform, we expect more companies to produce in the United States. This is an opportunity to export from America, while also selling within the country. Your investments in the United States are an important part of our program to create wealth and jobs in this country.
 
I would like to conclude my remarks by speaking about the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS).
Commercially-driven investment offers significant economic benefits for our country, which is why todayís event is so important. But it is also the governmentís responsibility to ensure the protection of national security. CFIUS is the body that reviews mergers, acquisitions, and takeovers that could result in foreign control of a U.S. business to identify and address any national security concerns. This is an important tool for the protection of U.S. national security. The process involved is both rigorous and fair.
 
We recognize that businesses need confidentiality and efficiency. By law, CFIUS does not publicly disclose information provided by parties to a transaction. Nor does it reveal the fact that parties have submitted the transaction for review. By statute, CFIUS must reach a conclusion within 30 to 75 days.
 
I want to emphasize that we make our evaluations looking to national security as our guiding criterion ñ we do not screen by industry or make blanket pronouncements. The reality is that the vast majority of transactions reviewed in the CFIUS process go forward without difficulty. This is because the vast majority of foreign investment in our country does not pose unresolvable national security concerns.
 
CFIUSís transaction-by-transaction approach allows for a more precise evaluation of the national security risks posed, taking into account all relevant facts and circumstances.
 
Our open process is a testament to the fact that we recognize the profound economic benefits of foreign investment. From manufacturing and infrastructure to financial services and technology, Americans benefit from having industrious and entrepreneurial foreign investors partner with us.
  
This is an exciting time to be doing business in America. And this Summit is a step in making investment and growth a reality. So on behalf of the President and the Administration, I want to welcome you to this fantastic Summit and I want to encourage you to invest in our great country.
